---
title: 'Digital Natives Seen Having Advantages as Part of Government AI Engineering Teams'
date: 2021-10-21
categories: [{'term': 'AI Engineering', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'AI World Government', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'Workforce', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'cross-functional teams', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'resilient mindset', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'software development', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'workforce', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}]
url: https://www.aitrends.com/ai-world-government/digital-natives-seen-having-advantages-as-part-of-government-ai-engineering-teams/
company: AITrends
authors: ['Allison Proffitt']
summary: 'By John P. Desmond, AI Trends Editor   AI is more accessible to young people in the workforce who grew up as ‘digital natives’ with Alexa and self-driving cars as part of the landscape, giving them expectations grounded in their experience of what is possible.   That idea set the foundation for a panel discussion at AI World […]'
---


![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-22NSFBuilding-2-100x70.jpeg)

_By John P. Desmond, AI Trends Editor_

AI is more accessible to young people in the workforce who grew up as ‘digital
natives’ with Alexa and self-driving cars as part of the landscape, giving
them expectations grounded in their experience of what is possible.

That idea set the foundation for a panel discussion at [AI World
Government](https://www.aiworldgov.com/) on Mindset Needs and Skill Set Myths
for AI engineering teams, held this week virtually and in-person in
Alexandria, Va.

![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-22DorothyAronson-2.jpeg)Dorothy Aronson, CIO and
Chief Data Officer, National Science Foundation

“People feel that AI is within their grasp because the technology is
available, but the technology is ahead of our cultural maturity,” said panel
member Dorothy Aronson, CIO and Chief Data Officer for the National Science
Foundation. “It’s like giving a sharp object to a child. We might have access
to big data, but it might not be the right thing to do,” to work with it in
all cases.

Things are accelerating, which is raising expectations. When panel member
Vivek Rao, lecturer and researcher at the University of California at
Berkeley, was working on his PhD, a paper on natural language processing might
be a master’s thesis. “Now we assign it as a homework assignment with a two-
day turnaround. We have an enormous amount of compute power that was not
available even two years ago,” he said of his students, who he described as
“digital natives” with high expectations of what AI makes possible.

![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-22RachelDzombak-2.jpeg)Rachel Dzombak, digital
transformation lead, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University

Panel moderator Rachel Dzombak, digital transformation lead at the [Software
Engineering Institute ](https://www.sei.cmu.edu/)of Carnegie Mellon
University, asked the panelists what is unique about working on AI in the
government.

Aronson said the government cannot get too far ahead with the technology, or
the users will not know how to interact with it. “We’re not building iPhones,”
she said. “We have experimentation going on, and we are always looking ahead,
anticipating the future, so we can make the most cost-effective decisions. In
the government right now, we are seeing the convergence of the emerging
generation and the close-to-retiring generation, who we also have to serve.”

Early in her career, Aronson did not want to work in the government. “I
thought it meant you were either in the armed services or the Peace Corps,”
she said. “But what I learned after a while is what motivates federal
employees is service to larger, problem-solving institutions. We are trying to
solve really big problems of equity and diversity, and getting food to people
and keeping people safe. People that work for the government are dedicated to
those missions.”

She referred to her two children in their 20s, who like the idea of service,
but in “tiny chunks,” meaning, “They don’t look at the government as a place
where they have freedom, and they can do whatever they want. They see it as a
lockdown situation. But it’s really not.”

**Berkeley Students Learn About Role of Government in Disaster Response**

Rao of Berkeley said his students are seeing wildfires in California and
asking who is working on the challenge of doing something about them. When he
tells them it is almost always local, state and federal government entities,
“Students are generally surprised to find that out.”

In one example, he developed a course on innovation in disaster response, in
collaboration with CMU and the Department of Defense, the Army Futures Lab and
Coast Guard search and rescue. “This was eye-opening for students,” he said.
At the outset, two of 35 students expressed interest in a federal government
career. By the end of the course, 10 of the 35 students were expressing
interest. One of them was hired by the Naval Surface Warfare Center outside
Corona, Calif. as a software engineer, Rao said.

Aronson described the process of bringing on new federal employees as a “heavy
lift,” suggesting, “if we could prepare in advance, it would move a lot
faster.”

![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-22BryanLane-2-188x300.jpeg)Bryan Lane, director of
Data & AI, General Services Administration

Asked by Dzombak what skill sets and mindsets are seen as essential to AI
engineering teams, panel member Bryan Lane, director of Data & AI at the
General Services Administration (who announced during the session that he is
taking on a new role at FDIC), said resiliency is a necessary quality.

Lane is a technology executive within the GSA IT Modernization Centers of
Excellence (CoE) with over 15 years of experience leading advanced analytics
and technology initiatives. He has led the GSA partnership with the DoD Joint
Artificial Intelligence Center (JAIC).  _[Ed. Note: Known as “the Jake.”]_
Lane also is the founder of [DATA XD.](https://www.dataxd.io/) He also has
experience in industry, managing acquisition portfolios.

“The most important thing about resilient teams going on an AI journey is that
you need to be ready for the unexpected, and the mission persists,” he said.
“If you are all aligned on the importance of the mission, the team can be held
together.”

**Good Sign that Team Members Acknowledge Having “Never Done This Before”**

Regarding mindset, he said more of his team members are coming to him and
saying, “I’ve never done this before.” He sees that as a good sign that offers
an opportunity to talk about risk and alternative solutions. “When your team
has the psychological safety to say that they don’t know something,” Lane sees
it as positive. “The focus is always on what you have done and what you have
delivered. Rarely is the focus on what you have not done before and what you
want to grow into,” he said,

Aronson has found it challenging to get AI projects off the ground. “It’s hard
to tell management that you have a use case or problem to solve and want to go
at it, and there is a 50-50 chance it will get done, and you don’t know how
much it’s going to cost,” she said. “It comes down to articulating the
rationale and convincing others it’s the right thing to do to move forward.”

Rao said he talks to students about experimentation and having an experimental
mindset. “AI tools can be easily accessible, but they can mask the challenges
you can encounter. When you apply the vision API, for example in the context
of challenges in your business or government agency, things may not be
smooth,” he said.

Moderator Dzombak asked the panelists how they build teams. Arson said, “You
need a mix of people.” She has tried “communities of practice” around solving
specific problems, where people can come and go. “You bring people together
around a problem and not a tool,” she said.

Lane seconded this. “I really have stopped focusing on tools in general,” he
said. He ran experiments at JAIC in accounting, finance and other areas. “We
found it’s not really about the tools. It’s about getting the right people
together to understand the problems, then looking at the tools available,” he
said.

Lane said he sets up “cross-functional teams” that are “a little more formal
than a community of interest.” He has found them to be effective for working
together on a problem for maybe 45 days. He also likes working with customers
of the needed services inside the organization, and has seen customers learn
about data management and AI as a result. “We will pick up one or two along
the way who become advocates for accelerating AI throughout the organization,”
Lane said.

Lane sees it taking five years to work out proven methods of thinking,
working, and best practices for developing AI systems to serve the government.
He mentioned [The Opportunity Project](https://opportunity.census.gov/) (TOP)
of the US Census Bureau, begun in 2016 to work on challenges such as ocean
plastic pollution, COVID-19 economic recovery and disaster response. TOP has
engaged in over 135 public-facing projects in that time, and has over 1,300
alumni including developers, designers, community leaders, data and policy
experts, students and government agencies.

“It’s based on a way of thinking and how to organize work,” Lane said. “We
have to scale the model of delivery, but five years from now, we will have
enough proof of concept to know what works and what does not.”

Learn more at [AI World Government](https://www.aiworldgov.com/), at the
[Software Engineering Institute](https://www.sei.cmu.edu/), at [DATA
XD](https://www.dataxd.io/) and at [The Opportunity
Project](https://opportunity.census.gov/).

