---
title: 'Predictive Maintenance Proving Out as Successful AI Use Case'
date: 2021-10-28
categories: [{'term': 'AI in Industry', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'Industrial IoT', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'Predictive Analytics', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'industrial IoT', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'predictive analytics', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}]
url: https://www.aitrends.com/predictive-analytics/predictive-maintenance-proving-out-as-successful-ai-use-case/
company: AITrends
authors: ['Allison Proffitt']
summary: 'By John P. Desmond, AI Trends Editor   More companies are successfully exploiting predictive maintenance systems that combine AI and IoT sensors to collect data that anticipates breakdowns and recommends preventive action before break or machines fail, in a demonstration of an AI use case with proven value.   This growth is reflected in optimistic market forecasts. […]'
---


![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-29PredictiveMaintenance-2-100x70.jpeg)

_By John P. Desmond, AI Trends Editor_

More companies are successfully exploiting predictive maintenance systems that
combine AI and IoT sensors to collect data that anticipates breakdowns and
recommends preventive action before break or machines fail, in a demonstration
of an AI use case with proven value.

This growth is reflected in optimistic market forecasts. The predictive
maintenance market is sized at $6.9 billion today and is projected to grow to
$28.2 billion by 2026, according to a report from [IoT Analytics](https://iot-
analytics.com/predictive-maintenance-market-evolution-from-niche-topic-to-
high-roi-application/) of Hamburg, Germany. The firm counts over 280 vendors
offering solutions in the market today, projected to grow to over 500 by 2026.

![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-29FernandoB-2.jpeg)Fernando Bruegge, Analyst, IoT
Analytics, Hamburg, Germany

“This research is a wake-up call to those that claim IoT is failing,” stated
analyst Fernando Bruegge, author of the report, adding, “For companies that
own industrial assets or sell equipment, now is the time to invest in
predictive maintenance-type solutions.” And, “Enterprise technology firms need
to prepare to integrate predictive maintenance solutions into their
offerings,” Bruegge suggested.

Here is a review of some specific experience with predictive maintenance
systems that combine AI and IoT sensors.

Aircraft engine manufacturer****[**Rolls-Royce**](https://www.rolls-
royce.com/) is [deploying predictive
analytics](https://www.cio.com/article/3620993/rolls-royce-turns-to-digital-
twins-to-improve-jet-engine-efficiency.html) to help reduce the amount of
carbon its engines produce, while also optimizing maintenance to help
customers keep planes in the air longer, according to a recent account in
[CIO](https://www.cio.com/article/3624014/predictive-analytics-4-success-
stories.html?upd=1635362935537).

Rolls-Royce built an Intelligent Engine platform to monitor engine flight,
gathering data on weather conditions and how pilots are flying. Machine
learning is applied to the data to customize maintenance regimes for
individual engines.

![](https://www.aitrends.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/10-29StuartHughes-2.jpeg)Stuart Hughes, chief
information and digital officer, Rolls-Royce

“We’re tailoring our maintenance regimes to make sure that we’re optimizing
for the life an engine has, not the life the manual says it should have,”
stated Stuart Hughes, chief information and digital officer at Rolls-Royce.
“It’s truly variable service, looking at each engine as an individual engine.”

Customers are seeing less service interruption. “Rolls-Royce has been
monitoring engines and charging per hour for at least 20 years,” Hughes
stated. “That part of the business isn’t new. But as we’ve evolved, we’ve
begun to treat the engine as a singular engine. It’s much more about the
personalization of that engine.”

Predictive analytics is being applied in healthcare as well as in the
manufacturing industry. Kaiser Permanente, the integrated managed care
consortium based in Oakland, Calif. Is using predictive analytics to identify
non-intensive care unit (ICU) patients at risk of rapid deterioration.

While non-ICU patients that require unexpected transfers to the ICU constitute
less than 4% of the total hospital population, they account for 20% of all
hospital deaths, according to Dr. Gabriel Escobar, research scientist,
Division of Research, and regional director, Hospital Operations Research,
Kaiser Permanente Northern California.

**Kaiser Permanente Practicing Predictive Maintenance in Healthcare**

Kaiser Permanente developed the Advanced Alert Monitor (AAM) system,
leveraging three predictive analytic models to analyze more than 70 factors in
a given patient’s electronic health record to generate a composite risk score.

“The AAM system synthesizes and analyzes vital statistics, lab results, and
other variables to generate hourly deterioration risk scores for adult
hospital patients in the medical-surgical and transitional care units,” stated
Dick Daniels, executive vice president and CIO of Kaiser Permanente in the CIO
account. “Remote hospital teams evaluate the risk scores every hour and notify
rapid response teams in the hospital when potential deterioration is detected.
The rapid response team conducts bedside evaluation of the patient and
calibrates the course treatment with the hospitalist.”

In advice to other practitioners, Daniels recommended a focus on how the tool
will be fit into the workflow of health care teams. “It took us about five
years to perform the initial mapping of the electronic medical record backend
and develop the predictive models,” Daniels stated. “It then took us another
two to three years to transition these models into a live web services
application that could be used operationally.”

In an example from the food industry, a PepsiCo Frito-Lay plant in
Fayetteville, Tenn. is using predictive maintenance successfully, with year-
to-date equipment downtime at 0.75% and unplanned downtime at 2.88%, according
to Carlos Calloway, the site’s reliability engineering manager, in an account
in [PlantServices](https://www.plantservices.com/articles/2021/push-the-
needle-how-6-companies-are-achieving-predictive-maintenance-success/).

Examples of monitoring include: vibration readings confirmed by ultrasound
helped to prevent a PC combustion blower motor from failing and shutting down
the whole potato chip department; infrared analysis of the main pole for the
plant’s GES automated warehouse detected a hot fuse holder, which helped to
avoid a shutdown of the entire warehouse; and increased acid levels were
detected in oil samples from a baked extruder gearbox, indicating oil
degradation, which enabled prevention of a shutdown of Cheetos Puffs
production.

The Frito-Lay plant produces more than 150 million pounds of product per year,
including Lays, Ruffles, Cheetos, Doritos, Fritos, and Tostitos.

The types of monitoring include vibration analysis, used on mechanical
applications, which is processed with the help of a third-party company which
sends alerts to the plant for investigation and resolution. Another service
partner performs quarterly vibration monitoring on selected equipment. All
motor control center rooms and electrical panels are monitored with quarterly
infrared analysis, which is also used on electrical equipment, some rotating
equipment, and heat exchangers. In addition, the plant has done ultrasonic
monitoring for more than 15 years, and it is “kind of like the pride and joy
of our site from a predictive standpoint,” stated Calloway.

The plan has a number of products in place from UE Systems of Elmsford, NY,
supplier of ultrasonic instruments, hardware and software, and training for
predictive maintenance.

**Louisiana Alumina Plant Automating Bearing Maintenance**

Bearings, which wear over time under varying conditions of weather and
temperature in the case of automobiles, are a leading candidate for IoT
monitoring and predictive maintenance with AI. The [Noranda
Alumina](http://www.newdayal.com/noranda-alumina) plant in Gramercy, La. is
finding a big payoff from its investment in a system to improve the
lubrication of bearings in its production equipment.

The system has resulted in a 60% decline in bearing changes in the second year
of using the new lubrication system, translating to some $900,000 in savings
on bearings that did not need to be replaced and avoided downtime.

“Four hours of downtime is about $1 million dollars’ worth of lost
production,” stated Russell Goodwin, a reliability engineer and millwright
instructor at Noranda Alumina, in the PlantServices account, which was based
on presentations at the Leading Reliability 2021 event.

The Noranda Alumina plant is the only alumina plant operating in the US. “If
we shut down, you’ll need to import it,” stated Goodwin. The plant experiences
pervasive dust, dirt, and caustic substances, which complicate efforts at
improved reliability and maintenance practices.

Noranda Alumina tracks all motors and gearboxes at 1,500 rpm and higher with
vibration readings, and most below 1,500 with ultrasound. Ultrasonic
monitoring, of sound in ranges beyond human hearing, was introduced to the
plant after Goodwin joined the company in 2019. At the time, grease monitoring
had room for improvement. “If grease was not visibly coming out of the seal,
the mechanical supervisor did not count the round as complete,” stated
Goodwin.

After introducing automation, the greasing system has improved dramatically,
he stated. The system was also able to detect bearings in a belt whose
bearings were wearing out too quickly due to contamination. “Tool-enabled
tracking helped to prove that it wasn’t improper greasing, but rather the
bearing was made improperly,” stated Goodwin.

Read the source articles and information in  [IoT Analytics](https://iot-
analytics.com/predictive-maintenance-market-evolution-from-niche-topic-to-
high-roi-application/), in
[CIO](https://www.cio.com/article/3624014/predictive-analytics-4-success-
stories.html?upd=1635362935537) and in
[PlantServices](https://www.plantservices.com/articles/2021/push-the-needle-
how-6-companies-are-achieving-predictive-maintenance-success/).

