---
title: 'From static prediction to dynamic characterization: AI2BMD advances protein dynamics with ab initio accuracy'
date: 2024-11-06
categories: ['Research Blog']
url: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/from-static-prediction-to-dynamic-characterization-ai2bmd-advances-protein-dynamics-with-ab-initio-accuracy/
company: Microsoft
authors: ['Brenda Potts']
summary: 'Microsoft Research’s AI2BMD, an AI-based system that efficiently simulates a wide range of proteins in all-atom resolution, can advance drug discovery and biomolecular research.
The post From static prediction to dynamic characterization: AI2BMD advances protein dynamics with ab initio accuracy appeared first on Microsoft Research.'
---


![AI2BMD blog hero - illustration of a chip with network nodes extending from
all sides](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/10/AI2BMD-BlogHeroFeature-1400x788-1.png)

The essence of the biological world lies in the ever-changing nature of its
molecules and their interactions. Understanding the dynamics and interactions
of biomolecules is crucial for deciphering the mechanisms behind biological
processes and for developing biomaterials and drugs. As Richard Feynman
famously said, “Everything that living things do can be understood in terms of
the jigglings and wigglings of atoms.” Yet capturing these real-life movements
is nearly impossible through experiments.

In recent years, with the development of deep learning methods represented by
AlphaFold and RoseTTAFold, predicting the static crystal protein structures
has been achieved with experimental accuracy (as recognized by the 2024 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry). However, accurately characterizing dynamics at an atomic
resolution remains much more challenging, especially when the proteins play
their roles and interact with other biomolecules or drug molecules.

As one approach, Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation combines the laws of
physics with numerical simulations to tackle the challenge of understanding
biomolecular dynamics. This method has been widely used for decades to explore
the relationship between the movements of molecules and their biological
functions. In fact, the significance of MD simulations was underscored when
the classic version of this technique was recognized with a [Nobel Prize in
2013 (opens in new
tab)](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2013/summary/)[ (opens in
new
tab)](https://the%20nobel%20prize%20in%20chemistry%202013%20-%20nobelprize.org/),
highlighting its crucial role in advancing our understanding of complex
biological systems. Similarly, the quantum mechanical approach—known as
Density Functional Theory (DFT)—received its own [Nobel Prize in 1998 (opens
in new tab)](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/1998/8811-the-nobel-
prize-in-chemistry-1998/)[ (opens in new
tab)](https://the%20nobel%20prize%20in%20chemistry%201998%20-%20nobelprize.org/),
marking a pivotal moment in computational chemistry.  

In MD simulations, molecules are modeled at the atomic level by numerically
solving equations of motions that account for the system's time evolution,
through which kinetic and thermodynamic properties can be computed. MD
simulations are used to model the time-dependent motions of biomolecules. If
you think of proteins like intricate gears in a clock, AI2BMD doesn’t just
capture them in place—it watches them spin, revealing how their movements
drive the complex processes that keep life running.

MD simulations can be roughly divided into two classes: classical MD and
quantum mechanics. Classical MD employs simplified representations of the
molecular systems, achieving fast simulation speed for long-time
conformational changes but less accurate. In contrast, quantum mechanics
models, such as Density Functional Theory, provide ground-up calculations, but
are computationally prohibitive for large biomolecules.

## _Ab initio_ biomolecular dynamics simulation by AI

Microsoft Research has been working on the development of efficient methods
aiming for _ab initio_ accuracy simulations of biomolecules. This method,
AI2BMD (**AI** -based **a** b **i** nitio **b** io**m** olecular **d** ynamics
system), has published in [the journal _Nature_ (opens in new
tab)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08127-z), representing the
culmination of a four-year research endeavor.

AI2BMD efficiently simulates a wide range of proteins in all-atom resolution
with more than 10,000 atoms at an approximate _ab initio_ —or _first-
principles_ —accuracy. It thus strikes a previously inaccessible tradeoff for
biomolecular simulations than standard simulation techniques - achieving
higher accuracies than classical simulation, at a computational cost that is
higher than classical simulation but orders of magnitude faster than what DFT
could achieve. This development could unlock new capabilities in biomolecular
modeling, especially for processes where high accuracy is needed, such as
protein-drug interactions.

![Fig.1 The overall pipeline of AI2BMD. Proteins are divided into protein
units by a fragmentation process. The AI2BMD potential is designed based on
ViSNet, and the datasets are generated at the DFT level. It calculates the
energy and atomic forces for the whole protein. The AI2BMD simulation system
is built upon these components and provides a generalizable solution for
simulating the molecular dynamics of proteins. It achieves ab initio accuracy
in energy and force calculations. Through comprehensive analysis from both
kinetics and thermodynamics perspectives, AI2BMD exhibits good alignment with
wet-lab experimental data and detects different phenomena compared to
molecular mechanics.](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/10/AI2BMD_Fig1.jpg)Figure 1. The flowchart of
AI2BMD

AI2BMD employs a novel-designed generalizable protein fragmentation approach
that splits proteins into overlapping units, creating a dataset of 20 million
snapshots—the largest ever at the DFT level. Based on our previously designed
[ViSNet (opens in new tab)](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/blog/visnet-a-general-molecular-geometry-modeling-framework-for-
predicting-molecular-properties-and-simulating-molecular-
dynamics/#:~:text=The%20vector-
scalar%20interactive%20graph%20neural%20network%20\(ViSNet\)?msockid=15f0bc1a2a64688f2ddaa80d2b1e69e6),
a universal molecular geometry modeling foundation model [published in _Nature
Communications_ (opens in new
tab)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-023-43720-2) and [incorporated
into PyTorch Geometry library (opens in new tab)](https://pytorch-
geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/generated/torch_geometric.nn.models.ViSNet.html),
we trained AI2BMD’s potential energy function using machine learning.
Simulations are then performed by the highly efficient AI2BMD simulation
system, where at each step, the AI2BMD potential based on ViSNet calculates
the energy and atomic forces for the protein with _ab initio_ accuracy. By
comprehensive analysis from both kinetics and thermodynamics, AI2BMD exhibits
much better alignments with wet-lab data, such as the folding free energy of
proteins and different phenomenon than classic MD.  

Microsoft research podcast

[ ![photo of Lex Story for the What's Your Story episode of the Microsoft
Research podcast](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/08/Lex-Story_WYS_Hero_Feature_1400x788.jpg)
](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/podcast/whats-your-story-lex-
story/)

## What’s Your Story: Lex Story

Model maker and fabricator Lex Story helps bring research to life through
prototyping. He discusses his take on failure; the encouragement and advice
that has supported his pursuit of art and science; and the sabbatical that
might inspire his next career move.

[ Listen now ](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/podcast/whats-your-
story-lex-story/)

Opens in a new tab

## Advancing biomolecular MD simulation

AI2BMD represents a significant advancement in the field of MD simulations
from the following aspects:

(1) **Ab initio accuracy:** introduces a generalizable “machine learning force
field,” a machine learned model of the interactions between atoms and
molecules, for full-atom protein dynamics simulations with _ab initio_
accuracy.

![Fig.2 Evaluation of energy and force calculations by AI2BMD and molecular
mechanics \(MM\). The upper panel exhibits the folded structures of four
evaluated proteins. The lower panel exhibits the mean absolute error \(MAE\)
of potential energy.](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/10/AI2BMD_Fig2_1400px.jpg)Figure 2. Evaluation
on the energy calculation error between AI2BMD and Molecular Mechanics (MM)
for different proteins.

(2) **Addressing generalization:** It is the first to address the
generalization challenge of a machine learned force field for simulating
protein dynamics, demonstrating robust ab initio MD simulations for a variety
of proteins.

(3) **General compatibility:** AI2BMD expands the Quantum Mechanics (QM)
modeling from small, localized regions to entire proteins without requiring
any prior knowledge on the protein. This eliminates the potential
incompatibility between QM and MM calculations for proteins and accelerates QM
region calculation by several orders of magnitude, bringing near _ab initio_
calculation for full-atom proteins to reality. Consequently, AI2BMD paves the
road for numerous downstream applications and allows for a fresh perspective
on characterizing complex biomolecular dynamics.

(4) **Speed advantage:** AI2BMD is several orders of magnitude faster than DFT
and other quantum mechanics. It supports ab initio calculations for proteins
with more than 10 thousand atoms, making it one of the fastest AI-driven MD
simulation programs among multidisciplinary fields.

![Fig.3 Comparison of time consumption between AI2BMD, DFT and other AI driven
simulation software. The left panel shows the time consumption of AI2BMD and
DFT. The right panel shows the time consumption of AI2BMD, DPMD and
Allegro.](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/10/AI2BMD_Fig3_1400px.jpg)Figure 3. Comparison
of time consumption between AI2BMD, DFT and other AI driven simulation
software.

(5) **Diverse conformational space exploration:** For the protein folding and
unfolding simulated by AI2BMD and MM, AI2BMD explores more possible
conformational space that MM cannot detect. Therefore, AI2BMD opens more
opportunities to study flexible protein motions during the drug-target binding
process, enzyme catalysis, allosteric regulations, intrinsic disorder proteins
and so on, better aligning with the wet-lab experiments and providing more
comprehensive explanations and guidance to biomechanism detection and drug
discovery.

![Fig.4 Analysis of the simulation trajectories performed by AI2BMD. In the
upper panel, AI2BMD folds protein of Chignolin starting from an unfolded
structure and achieves smaller energy error than MM. In the lower panel, it
explores more conformational regions that MM cannot
detect.](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/10/AI2BMD_Fig4_1400px.jpg)Figure 4. AI2BMD folds
protein of Chignolin starting from an unfolded structure, achieves smaller
energy error than MM and explores more conformational regions that MM cannot
detect.

(6) **Experimental agreement:** AI2BMD outperforms the QM/MM hybrid approach
and demonstrates high consistency with wet-lab experiments on different
biological application scenarios, including J-coupling, enthalpy, heat
capacity, folding free energy, melting temperature, and pKa calculations.

## Looking ahead

Achieving _ab initio_ accuracy in biomolecular simulations is challenging but
holds great potential for understanding the mystery of biological systems and
designing new biomaterials and drugs. This breakthrough is a testament to the
vision of AI for Science—an initiative to channel the capabilities of
artificial intelligence to revolutionize scientific inquiry. The proposed
framework aims to address limitations regarding accuracy, robustness, and
generalization in the application of machine learning force fields. AI2BMD
provides generalizability, adaptability, and versatility in simulating various
protein systems by considering the fundamental structure of proteins, namely
stretches of amino acids. This approach enhances energy and force calculations
as well as the estimation of kinetic and thermodynamic properties.

One key application of AI2BMD is its ability to perform highly accurate
virtual screening for drug discovery. In 2023, at the inaugural [Global AI
Drug Development competition (opens in new tab)](https://www.msra.cn/zh-
cn/news/features/ai-drug-rd-algorithm-competition),  AI2BMD made a
breakthrough by predicting a chemical compound that binds to the main protease
of SARS-CoV-2. Its precise predictions surpassed those of all other
competitors, securing first place and showcasing its immense potential to
accelerate real-world drug discovery efforts.

Since 2022, Microsoft Research also partnered with the Global Health Drug
Discovery Institute (GHDDI), a nonprofit research institute founded and
supported by the Gates Foundation, to apply AI technology to design drugs that
treat diseases that unproportionally affect low- and middle- income countries
(LMIC), such as tuberculosis and malaria. Now, we have been closely
collaborating with GHDDI to leverage AI2BMD and other AI capabilities to
accelerate the drug discovery process.

AI2BMD can help advance solutions to scientific problems and enable new
biomedical research in drug discovery, protein design, and enzyme engineering.  

Opens in a new tab

The post [From static prediction to dynamic characterization: AI2BMD advances
protein dynamics with ab initio accuracy](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/blog/from-static-prediction-to-dynamic-characterization-ai2bmd-
advances-protein-dynamics-with-ab-initio-accuracy/) appeared first on
[Microsoft Research](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research).

