---
title: 'Abstracts: November 14, 2024'
date: 2024-11-14
categories: [{'term': 'Microsoft Research Podcast', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}]
url: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/podcast/abstracts-november-14-2024/
company: Microsoft
authors: ['Alyssa Hughes (2ADAPTIVE LLC dba 2A Consulting)']
summary: <p>The efficient simulation of molecules has the potential to change how the world understands biological systems and designs new drugs and biomaterials. Tong Wang discusses AI2BMD, an AI-based system designed to simulate large biomolecules with speed and accuracy.</p>
<p>The post <a href="https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/podcast/abstracts-november-14-2024/">Abstracts: November 14, 2024</a> appeared first on <a href="https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research">Microsoft Research</a>.</p>
---


![Outlined illustrations of Tong Wang and Bonnie Kruft for the Microsoft
Research Podcast, Abstracts series.](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/uploads/prod/2024/11/Tong-and-
Bonnie_Abstracts_Hero_Feature_No_Text_1400x788.jpg)

Members of the research community at Microsoft work continuously to advance
their respective fields. _Abstracts_ brings its audience to the cutting edge
with them through short, compelling conversations about new and noteworthy
achievements.

In this episode, Microsoft Senior Researcher [Tong
Wang](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/people/watong/) joins guest
host [Bonnie Kruft](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/people/bonniekruft/?msockid=35739e94ab6c69d41b738b93aa076831),
partner and deputy director of Microsoft Research AI for Science, to discuss
[“Ab initio characterization of protein molecular dynamics with
AI2BMD.”](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/ab-initio-
characterization-of-protein-molecular-dynamics-with-ai2bmd/) In the paper,
which was published by the scientific journal _Nature_ , Wang and his
coauthors detail a system that leverages AI to advance the state of the art in
simulating the behavior of large biomolecules. AI2BMD, which is generalizable
across a wide range of proteins, has the potential to advance solutions to
scientific problems and enhance biomedical research in drug discovery, protein
design, and enzyme engineering.

[Read the paper](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/ab-
initio-characterization-of-protein-molecular-dynamics-with-ai2bmd/)

[Get the code](https://github.com/microsoft/AI2BMD)

## Transcript

[MUSIC]

**BONNIE KRUFT:** Welcome to _Abstracts_ , a Microsoft Research Podcast that
puts the spotlight on world-class research in brief. In this series, members
of the research community at Microsoft give us a quick snapshot—or a _podcast
abstract_ —of their new and noteworthy papers.

[MUSIC FADES]

I’m Bonnie Kruft, partner and deputy director of Microsoft Research AI for
Science and your host for today. Joining me is Tong Wang, a senior researcher
at Microsoft. Tong is the lead author of a paper called “Ab initio
characterization of protein molecular dynamics with AI2BMD,” which has just
been published by the top scientific journal _Nature_. Tong, thanks so much
for joining us today on _Abstracts_!

**TONG WANG:** Thank you, Bonnie.

**KRUFT:** Microsoft Research is one of the earliest institutions to apply AI
in biomolecular simulation research. Why did the AI for Science team choose
this direction, and—with this work specifically, AI2BMD—what problem are you
and your coauthors addressing, and why should people know about it?

**WANG:** So as Richard Feynman famously said, “Everything that living things
do can be understood in terms of the _jigglings_ and the _wigglings_ of
atoms.” To study the mechanisms behind the biological processes and to develop
biomaterials and drugs requires a computational approach that can accurately
characterize the dynamic motions of biomolecules. When we review the
computational research for biomolecular structure, we can get two key
messages. First, in recent years, predicting the crystal, or _static_ ,
protein structures with methods powered by AI has achieved great success and
just won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in the last month. However,
characterizing the dynamic structures of proteins is more meaningful for
biology, drug, and medicine fields but is much more challenging. Second,
molecular dynamics simulation, or _MD_ , is one of the most widely used
approaches to study protein dynamics, which can be roughly divided into
classical molecular dynamics simulation and quantum molecular dynamics
simulation. Both approaches have been developed for more than a half century
and won Nobel Prize. Classical MD is fast but less accurate, while quantum MD
is very accurate but computationally prohibitive for the protein study.
However, we need both the accuracy and the efficiency to detect the
biomechanisms. Thus, applying AI in biomolecular simulation can become the
third way to achieve both ab initio—or _first principles_ —accuracy and high
efficiency. In the winter of 2020, we have foreseen the trend that AI can make
a difference in biomolecular simulations. Thus, we chose this direction.

**KRUFT:** It took four years from the idea to the launch of AI2BMD, and there
were many important milestones along the way. First, talk about how your work
builds on and/or differs from what’s been done previously in this field, and
then give our audience a sense of the key moments and challenges along the
AI2BMD research journey.

**WANG:** First, I’d like to say applying AI in biomolecular simulation is a
novel research field. For AI-powered MD simulation for large biomolecules,
there is no existing dataset, no well-designed machine learning model for the
interactions between the atoms and the molecules, no clear technical roadmap,
no mature AI-based simulation system. So we face various new challenges every
day. Second, there are some other works exploring this area at the same time.
I think a significant difference between AI2BMD and other works is that other
works require to generate new data and train the deep learning models for any
new proteins. So it takes a protein-specific solution. As a contrast, AI2BMD
proposes a generalizable solution for a wide range of proteins. To achieve it,
as you mentioned, there are some key milestones during the four-year journey.
The first one is we proposed the generalizable protein fragmentation approach
that divides proteins into the commonly used 20 kinds of dipeptides. Thus, we
don’t need to generate data for various proteins. Instead, we only need to
sample the conformational space of such dipeptides. So we built the protein
unit dataset that contains about 20 million samples with ab initio accuracy.
Then we proposed ViSNet, the graph neural network for molecular geometry
modeling as the machine learning potential for AI2BMD. Furthermore, we
designed AI2BMD simulation system by efficiently leveraging CPUs and GPUs at
the same time, achieving hundreds of times simulation speed acceleration than
one year before and accelerating the AI-driven simulation with only ten to a
hundred millisecond per simulation step. Finally, we examined AI2BMD on
energy, force, free energy, J coupling, and many kinds of property
calculations for tens of proteins and also applied AI2BMD in the drug
development competition. All things are done by the great team with science
and engineering expertise and the great leadership and support from AI for
Science lab.

**KRUFT:** Tell us about how you conducted this research. What was your
methodology?

**WANG:** As exploring an interdisciplinary research topic, our team consists
of experts and students with biology, chemistry, physics, math, computer
science, and engineering backgrounds. The teamwork with different expertise is
key to AI2BMD research. Furthermore, we collaborated and consulted with many
senior experts in the molecular dynamics simulation field, and they provided
very insightful and constructive suggestions to our research. Another aspect
of the methodology I’d like to emphasize is learning from negative results.
Negative results happened most of the time during the study. What we do is to
constantly analyze the negative results and adjust our algorithm and model
accordingly. There’s no perfect solution for a research topic, and we are
always on the way.

**KRUFT:** AI2BMD got some upgrades this year, and as we mentioned at the top
of the episode, the work around the latest system was published in the
scientific journal _Nature_. So tell us, Tong—what is new about the latest
AI2BMD system?

**WANG:** Good question. We posted a preliminary version of AI2BMD manuscript
on bioRxiv last summer. I’d like to share three important upgrades through the
past one and a half year. The first is hundreds of times of simulation speed
acceleration for AI2BMD, which becomes one of the fastest AI-driven MD
simulation system and leads to perform much longer simulations than before.
The second aspect is AI2BMD was applied for many protein property
calculations, such as enthalpy, heat capacity, folding free energy, p _K_ a,
and so on. Furthermore, we have been closely collaborating with the Global
Health Drug Discovery Institute, GHDDI, a nonprofit research institute founded
and supported by the Gates Foundation, to leverage AI2BMD and other AI
capabilities to accelerate the drug discovery processes.

**KRUFT:** What significance does AI2BMD hold for research in both biology and
AI? And also, what impact does it have outside of the lab, in terms of
societal and individual benefits?

**WANG:** Good question. For biology, AI2BMD provides a much more accurate
approach than those used in the past several decades to simulate the protein
dynamic motions and study the bioactivity. For AI, AI2BMD proves AI can make a
big difference to the dynamic protein structure study beyond AI for the
protein static structure prediction. Raised by AI2BMD and other works, I can
foresee there is a coming age of AI-driven biomolecular simulation, providing
binding free-energy calculation with quantum simulation accuracy for the
complex of drug and the target protein for drug discovery, detecting more
flexible biomolecular conformational changes that molecular mechanics cannot
do, and opening more opportunities for enzyme engineering and vaccine and
antibody design.

**KRUFT:** AI is having a profound influence on the speed and breadth of
scientific discovery, and we’re excited to see more and more talented people
joining us in this space. What do you want our audience to take away from this
work, particularly those already working in the AI for Science space or
looking to enter it?

**WANG:** Good question. I’d like to share three points from my research
experience. First is aim high. Exploring a disruptive research topic is better
than doing 10 incremental works. In the years of research, our organization
always encourages us to do the big things. Second is persistence. I remembered
a computer scientist previously said about 90% of the time during research is
failure and frustration. The rate is even higher when exploring a new research
direction. In AI2BMD study, when we suffered from research bottlenecks that
cannot be tackled for several months, when we received critical comments from
reviewers, when some team members wanted to give up and leave, I always
encourage everyone to persist, and we will make it. More importantly, the
foundation of persistence is to ensure your research direction is meaningful
and constantly adjust your methodology from failures and critical feedback.
The third one is real-world applications. Our aim is to leverage AI for
advancing science. Proposing scientific problems is a first step, then
developing AI tools and evaluating on benchmarks and, more importantly,
examining its usefulness in the real-world applications and further developing
your AI algorithms. In this way, you can close the loop of AI for Science
research.

**KRUFT:** And, finally, Tong, what unanswered questions or unsolved problems
remain in this area, and what’s next on the agenda for the AI2BMD team?

**WANG:** Well, I think AI2BMD is a starting point for the coming age of AI-
driven MD for biomolecules. There are lots of new scientific questions and
challenges coming out in this new field. For example, how to expand the
simulated molecules from proteins to other kinds of biomolecules; how to
describe the biochemical reactions during the simulations; how to further
improve the simulation efficiency and robustness; and how to apply it for more
real-world scenarios. We warmly welcome any people from both academic and
industrial fields to work together with us to make the joint efforts to push
the frontier of this new field moving forward.

[MUSIC]

**KRUFT:** Well, Tong, thank you for joining us today, and to our listeners,
thanks for tuning in. If you want to read the full paper on AI2BMD, you can
find a link at aka.ms/abstracts, or you can read it on the _Nature_ website.
See you next time on _Abstracts_!

[MUSIC FADES]

Show more

Opens in a new tab

The post [Abstracts: November 14, 2024](https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/podcast/abstracts-november-14-2024/) appeared first on [Microsoft
Research](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research).

