---
title: '3 Ways AI Agents Bridge the Gap Between Remote and In-Office Workers'
date: 2024-10-30
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-and-remote-work/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Lisa Lee']
summary: By automating routine tasks, coordinating workflows, and facilitating real-time communication, agents mitigate many of the challenges that arise with hybrid work teams.
---


The push/pull of hybrid work continues, with
[more](https://www.forbes.com/sites/rachelwells/2024/10/14/70-of-employers-to-
crack-down-on-remote-work-in-2025/) business leaders planning to require
workers to return to offices. Right now, though, one quarter of U.S. workers —
more than 35 million people — [work remotely](https://backlinko.com/remote-
work-stats#remote-work-benefits-and-challenges) at least part of the time.
Many workers are resisting the call to return, even as business leaders say
in-person attendance is necessary to succeed. But here’s something to
consider: The very things that some business leaders worry are lost with
remote or hybrid work — productivity, innovation, collaboration — can be
significantly enhanced with autonomous agents.

[Autonomous agents](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/autonomous-agents/)
are an advanced form of artificial intelligence (AI) that can understand and
respond to inquiries without human intervention. Unlike bots, which follow
predefined rules, autonomous agents operate in a dynamic environment, making
them ideal for carrying out complex, multistep tasks. This capability is
particularly valuable in the context of AI and remote work, where seamless
communication and efficient task management are crucial.
[Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/) is Salesforce’s suite of
tools, services, and actions to help companies quickly build and deploy such
agents.

While agents are most often discussed in customer service or sales scenarios,
they’ll be transformative for routine work across the enterprise, as well.
Agents will streamline communication, automate tasks, and bridge gaps between
remote and in-office workers. They’ll redefine not only how individuals work,
but how collaboration happens.

By automating routine tasks, facilitating communication, and maintaining a
constant presence, agents empower remote workers to stay in sync with their
in-office counterparts, reshaping how they work together, no matter where they
are. Here are three key ways agents help hybrid teams work better together.

## 1\. Agents make workers more productive

Collaboration tools like Slack, Dropbox, and Google Workspace helped enable
remote work, but AI and remote work are evolving together in exciting ways
through intelligent, dynamic, personalized AI agents.

Agents can automate many tasks including scheduling meetings, generating
summaries, writing emails, doing research, and analyzing data. These are
important, time-consuming things that an agent can do for workers, freeing
them up to collaborate with colleagues wherever they may be, and focus on more
strategic work. And because agents built with Agentforce have access to
Salesforce customer relationship management
([CRM](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/?d=cta-body-promo-8)) data like
marketing, sales, service, commerce, and industries, they provide real-time,
data-driven insights, grounded in your business context, so teams and agents
can make informed decisions and take action within the CRM environment.

##  What to read next

[ ![An image of a woman and an AI agent standing
together](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/TSK-38418_The_Enterprise_AI_Revolution.jpg?w=889)
LLMs and Copilots Alone Won't Save You: Why You're Doing Enterprise AI Wrong
](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/complete-ai-system/)

[ ![An illustration of a crystal ball with a box and a grid
inside.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/TSK-37965_Ai_Myths_V2.jpg?w=889) 5 Myths About
AI Agents  ](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-agent-myths/)

[ ![An illustration showing a woman holding a cup of coffee and looking at a
robot working.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/TSK-36969_AI_Agents_The_Future_of_Business_Applications_UPDATE.jpg?w=889)
AI Agents: The Future of Business Applications
](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-software-development/)

[ ![An AI agent and a human worker hold a flag with an image of a checkmark on
it: trustworthy AI](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/trustworthy-ai-agents.jpg?w=889) 5 Ways To
Build Trustworthy AI Agents  ](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/trustworthy-ai-
agent/)

Let’s say a manager wants to automate every in-person meeting, and have a
follow-up summary. They’d create an agent that generates the summary, composes
an email, and sends it to all stakeholders whether they attended in person,
remotely, or not at all. This is the next wave of automation that lets
employees automate more-complex tasks and free up their time for higher-impact
work.  

Mick Costigan, vice president of Salesforce Futures, [recently
said](https://www.salesforce.com/news/stories/building-business-ai-agents/),
“Right now we’re seeing little dollops of AI productivity being added to
existing processes, but over time what we expect is that work will truly be
transformed.”

## 2\. Agents facilitate real-time communication and collaboration

Much has been said about the benefit of spontaneous hallway conversations at
work, and what’s lost when hybrid workers don’t have those informal
interactions to spark creativity, build relationships, and facilitate quick
problem-solving.

Agents help far-flung teams overcome this. They intelligently filter and
prioritize notifications, ensuring that team members are alerted to important
updates or messages without being overwhelmed by constant pings. They also
provide real-time updates and context around ongoing projects, keeping team
members informed about developments and allowing them to have relevant
discussions as they happen.

[Slack AI](https://slack.com/blog/news/slack-ai-has-arrived) is a good
example. It’s a set of built-in generative AI tools that help teams search
smarter using natural language, summarize conversations, channels, and direct
messages, and recap your day based on work that’s taken place in Slack.

Adam Evans, senior vice president of product, Salesforce AI platform, painted
[another picture](https://www.salesforce.com/news/stories/integrating-ai-
agents/): You wrap up a morning sales call, and your agent has already
summarized the conversation, updated your CRM, sent action items to your
marketing colleagues, flagged upsell opportunities, and scheduled follow-up
meetings — all without you lifting a finger.

This example shows how context-aware agents can enhance real-time
communication and collaboration among dispersed teams.

## 3\. Agents help manage project workflows

Your team works in three different countries, but that doesn’t mean you can’t
work cohesively. AI and remote work go hand in hand here, as agents work 24/7
to bridge some of the inherent time zone challenges international teams face.
How? They help manage project workflows by tracking progress, assigning tasks,
and sending reminders, helping teams stay aligned and on top of deadlines,
responsibilities, and updates.

Consider a team working on a product launch. An agent monitors goals and
deadlines, automatically assigning tasks based on people’s availability,
skills, and workload. If a product designer in one country completes a task,
the agent reassigns the next task to a designer in another country, ensuring
continuous progress.

The agent tracks progress, and notifies team members of potential blockers. It
may even suggest solutions based on similar past problems. The agent can
adjust deadlines and coordinate communication by scheduling meetings.

## Agents will transform work, and sooner than you think

For all the talk of technology making us faster, there are still some very
human blockers to getting work done. Maybe you spaced out in a meeting, or
held up a workflow because you forgot to respond to a Slack message. By
automating routine tasks, coordinating workflows, and facilitating real-time
communication, agents mitigate many of the challenges that arise with hybrid
work teams. They keep everyone aligned by managing schedules, tracking
progress, and distributing information, so no one is left out of the loop.

Perhaps most importantly, agents are workhorses. They work around the clock,
ensuring that time zone differences, busy schedules, and shifting priorities
don’t get in the way of collaboration.

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-cloud-layout-astro.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-background-layout-astro.png)

## Discover the power of AI agents

Learn more about generative AI and agents, launch your very first agent, and
understand how to build an AI project.

[Start now ](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/trails/get-ready-
for-
agentforce?_ga=2.168453095.796721228.1730109239-1011194532.1704725036&_gac=1.187154010.1729537834.Cj0KCQjw99e4BhDiARIsAISE7P_Kve470UCvt_OS8-ap5888HPNqxckLFK4cGmMCyaI5ZYSKoMPQPtMaAs8cEALw_wcB)

+1,500 points

Trail

[Get ready for
Agentforce](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/trails/get-ready-
for-
agentforce?_ga=2.168453095.796721228.1730109239-1011194532.1704725036&_gac=1.187154010.1729537834.Cj0KCQjw99e4BhDiARIsAISE7P_Kve470UCvt_OS8-ap5888HPNqxckLFK4cGmMCyaI5ZYSKoMPQPtMaAs8cEALw_wcB)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-foreground-layout-astro.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-parks-layout-astro.png)

