---
title: 'Planning Your Cyber Week Pricing Strategy? Let AI Lead the Way'
date: 2024-10-30
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/retail-pricing-with-ai/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Patricia Staino']
summary: Pricing will be critical this holiday season, and agent recommendations could make all the difference.
---


There’s no denying [competitive
pricing](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/03/14/six-ways-
retail-can-leverage-generative-ai-to-transform-business/) will play a big role
in winning shoppers’ Cyber Week business this year. In fact, we expect Chinese
shopping apps to [tally up $160 billion in
sales](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/holiday-shopping-predictions/) this
holiday season. Why? Because shoppers, who have been taking on quite a bit of
debt, are being careful with their wallets, prioritizing price over quality.
The good news is AI can give you a competitive edge by recommending dynamic
price and promotion strategies that [make shoppers
merry](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/holiday-shopping-predictions/).

## Why use AI for retail pricing and promotions?

You may already use AI to analyze historical data and predict supply and
demand. But today’s AI - in the form of
[agents](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/what-are-ai-agents/) -  takes
that analysis to the next level. Agents look at your historical sales data and
pull in real-time store videos and photos, social media posts, competitor
websites, online reviews, and more to gauge consumer interest and [generate
competitive landscapes](https://www.simon-kucher.com/en/insights/three-ways-
get-more-value-your-pricing-process-generative-ai). AI can then create retail
pricing scenarios that balance inventory, demand, and margin – along with
generating new and innovative content based on that analysis.

[Agents](https://www.salesforce.com/commerce/ai/) bring unmatched precision
and agility to pricing and promotion strategies. By analyzing your data, AI
can predict customer demand and optimize prices, so you remain competitive
while maximizing profits. Additionally, agents can personalize promotions
based on individual customer behaviors, enhancing engagement and conversion
rates. Even better, agents can automate and streamline the complex processes
involved in pricing and promotions, freeing up your teams to focus on
strategic initiatives and customer experiences.

By combining AI with your trusted customer data, you can inform and transform
your promotional calendar from Prime Day straight through Cyber Monday.  

## Delight your loyal customers this holiday season

Learn to use data and AI to create magical retail experiences.

[Unwrap the holiday
guide](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/retail/holiday-readiness/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-five.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-five.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-five.png)

## **Choose base prices that please shoppers**** _and_****CFOs  **

Since price sensitivity likely will continue through the holiday shopping
season, price optimization remains essential for meeting business goals.
Finding a price shoppers will love and your margins can bear yields higher
sales volumes, improved conversion rates, and increased revenue.

Price optimization isn’t new. But complementing historical sales data with
price elasticity, customer preferences, and market trends in real time is the
latest shift. You won’t gain traction, though, by manually scrolling Instagram
or comparing spreadsheets to gather data. Instead, prompt agents to analyze
things like last year’s sales, competitors’ sites, economic predictions, and
trending products on Twitter.

Agents can predict the hottest toys of the season or the running shoe
millennials will be hoarding, and then
[recommend](https://venturebeat.com/datadecisionmakers/how-ai-powered-pricing-
improves-margins-and-protects-consumers/) competitive retail pricing that will
bring shoppers to your site and stores. The technology can build multiple
models and recommend price adjustments based on if/then prompts.

This helps your teams quickly set base prices that make you more competitive
with other retailers. It also helps you plan markdowns throughout the season
to optimize demand and margin. You’ll finish the season selling as much
inventory as possible at the highest price the market will bear.

**Pro tip:** To get the most from an agent’s price recommendations, look to
your team’s marketing, pricing, and product expertise to validate strategies
against demand forecasts. Human experts know what works and what doesn’t for
retail pricing strategies that move inventory. They also make empathetic
judgment calls that reflect your company values, social norms, and customer
expectations.

## **Adjust prices and promotions to meet real-time market conditions**

With [95% of
shoppers](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/03/14/six-ways-
retail-can-leverage-generative-ai-to-transform-business/) tracking and
comparing prices online when shopping in-store, dynamic pricing could make or
break your Cyber Week sales. Retailers use dynamic pricing to adapt to
evolving real-time market conditions and customer demand. A fluid pricing
strategy works alongside your seasonal promotional calendar – central to your
merchandising strategy and execution – with price adjustments based on product
category, shopper demographics, inventory thresholds, and other related
criteria.

Of course, it’s much easier to carry out dynamic pricing online than in-store.
With agents, you can easily automate immediate pricing changes across your
website, but to make the change in stores, be prepared to ask employees to
manually update signs and labels.

By continuously adjusting online prices throughout Cyber Week, retailers can
make the most of high-demand periods to [maximize revenue and increase profit
margins](https://www.computerweekly.com/blog/Taking-stock-of-retail-tech/As-
Inflation-Rages-On-Retailers-Turn-to-AI-and-Dynamic-Pricing). You’ll also
manage margins better by _not_ offering discounts on products that are less
price-sensitive. And when demand is low, dynamic pricing can help stimulate
sales through discounts or promotions. You also can use agents to automate
pricing adjustments to reward loyal customers.

As agents monitor demand, you can be alerted when inventory levels and pricing
trends change throughout Cyber Week. When competitors raise their price on a
popular gaming console that’s low in stock, for example, you can direct the
agent to make a similar adjustment. AI can recommend a price tweak and, if
you’ve set predefined rules, the technology can automatically update prices on
your website. If you want to make changes in-store as well, an agent can
update store computer systems to the new pricing and alert store associates to
make the change at the shelf.

**Pro tip:** Be sure to keep humans in the review process to balance perceived
value and price. It’s tempting to undercut your fiercest competitor with a
too-good-to-be-true deal, but shoppers might question your prices later when
they bounce back to normal. Similarly, charging too much for a hard-to-find
item can make shoppers feel you’re gouging them, compelling them to buy from a
competitor.

## **Test and tweak strategies continually**

Once AI has made its recommendations, you can use the technology to test base
pricing, markdowns, and promotions. It can simulate and compare the outcomes
for a range of prices to show how fluctuations affect sales, revenue, and
other key metrics.

Agents can also carry out testing in real-world situations, monitoring and
adjusting pricing based on immediate data and feedback. The technology can
assign pricing options to customers and adapt the base or discounted price
according to test results. If one price proves more popular with shoppers, you
can quickly pivot and assign that price across your stores and website.

For greater accuracy, you also can add instantaneous data sources like foot
traffic sensors and heat maps to aid in-store testing. As shopper behavior
fluctuates, AI can flag the changes and recommend updates to your strategy.

**Pro tip:** Choose metrics that tie directly to your goals, and clearly
define them in [your AI prompt](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/generative-ai-
prompts/). For example, if you want to increase sales, ask the agent for
recommendations that boost sales volume or conversion rates. If customer
loyalty is your priority, ask the agent for prices that spur repeat purchases
and increase customer satisfaction levels.

## **Put shoppers at the center of your retail pricing and promotion**

While agents are a powerful tool for developing effective retail pricing and
promotional strategies, your shoppers ultimately make the final call. Actively
seek out and evaluate their feedback — continually and in real time — on your
prices, product offerings, and discounts.

Use AI to help monitor customer reviews, process surveys, and gather
qualitative feedback to understand the effectiveness and appeal of your
pricing strategy. Then use that data to plan for long-term success and to
continue training the agent to make more relevant recommendations in the
future.

## Turn holiday shopping trends into yearlong retail success

Learn how 1.5+ billion consumers are shaping retail, from holiday sprees to
everyday needs.

[Get our shopping insights](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/shopping-
insights/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-one.png)

