---
title: '3 Ways Life Sciences Organizations Can Use AI Today'
date: 2024-11-08
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-for-life-sciences/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Kaitlyn Castaneira Gizzi']
summary: With AI for life sciences, Pharma and MedTech companies can improve efficiency and better support patients and healthcare professionals.
---


Artificial intelligence (AI) for life sciences has the potential to help your
organization make better decisions by integrating into daily workflows for
healthier businesses and better outcomes. From process automation and
predictive intelligence to generative and [agentic
AI](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/), an industry-specific [AI-powered
CRM platform](https://www.salesforce.com/healthcare-life-sciences/life-
sciences-software/) can provide the essential tools for Pharma and MedTech
companies to easily set up and use reliable AI solutions.

By scaling services to deliver life-enhancing therapies to patients faster, AI
for life sciences can help Pharma and MedTech companies boost efficiency and
better support patients and healthcare professionals (HCPs) whether it's
during clinical trials or staying connected with patients to help improve
treatment adherence.

### AI for life sciences offers three practical use cases you can adopt today:

  1. [Improved clinical trial recruitment and study conduct that can accelerate drug development.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-1-improved-clinical-trial-recruitment-and-study-conduct)
  2. [Time savings for sales reps with automation and proactive notifications that can increase HCP interactions.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-2-time-savings-for-sales-reps-with-automation-and-proactive-notifications)
  3. [More effective patient support programs that can spur faster time to therapy and improved patient outcomes.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-3-more-effective-patient-support-programs)

## 1\. Improved clinical trial recruitment and study conduct

Life Sciences organizations face increasing competition to enroll clinical
trial participants. This is because the volume of clinical trials is growing,
but the growth of the participant pool is not. Much of that is due to not
being able to identify the right candidates or keep the ones they do find
engaged. In fact, 80% of clinical trials [fail to meet participant enrollment
targets](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7342339/), and most eligible
candidates don’t even know about the trials they qualify for.  Enrollment
still happens manually on a trial by trial basis, resulting in slower time to
market.

AI for life sciences can improve clinical trial recruitment and segmentation.
Your clinical and research and development teams can take advantage of
generative AI to [intelligently and more accurately
match](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/use-
cases/healthcare/participant-recruitment-and-enrollment/) prospective trial
participants to eligible trials. Identifying and targeting eligible
participants faster can reduce trial costs, help meet trial enrollment rates,
and limit dropout — factors that together can accelerate drug development.
Eventually, clinical trial teams will be able to take advantage of autonomous
agents to help them further speed up the time to trial.

Further, agentic AI can help you streamline the process of determining optimal
sites that are most likely to yield success for a clinical trial. Agents can
analyze combined historical healthcare information, geographic data, and past
site performance data to determine the sites with the highest likelihood of
success.

Similarly, you can use data and generative AI to author clinical business
cases that you can use to support investment decisions. Once you have secured
funding to run a study, you can use predictive AI to pool scientific data,
patient population data, market data, and prescribing data to design a
clinical study.

##  More in AI for Life Sciences

[ ![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/Industries-AI-Life-Sciences-Explainer-Page-
Marque-Image1-1-copy.jpg?w=745) Trusted AI for Life Sciences
](https://www.salesforce.com/healthcare-life-sciences/life-sciences-
artificial-intelligence/)

[ ![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/AI-
for-Industries-Ai-For-Life-Sciences-Use-Case-Page-Participant-Enrollment-
Marqueee-copy.jpg?w=702) Candidate Auto-Matching for Trials
](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/use-
cases/healthcare/participant-recruitment-and-enrollment/)

[ ![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/Industries-AI-AI-for-Health-Explainer-
Page-10-Use-Case-4-Patient-Program-Outcome-Management-feature-2_-Patient-
Outcome-Summary-copy.jpg?w=655) Manage Patient and Program Outcomes
](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/use-
cases/healthcare/outcome-management/)

[ ![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/FY25-Q2-HLS-HBR-LSC-Report-RC-FC.jpg?w=889)
Connecting Patients to Therapies and Devices Faster with AI
](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/healthcare-life-sciences/ai-in-life-
science-report/)

## 2\. Time savings for sales reps with automation and proactive notifications

AI for life sciences can help your sales reps save significant time and effort
with AI-powered inventory agents that send automated notifications about
product shortages. These agents not only alert reps to potential stock
shortages but also suggest solutions like transferring devices from another
rep's inventory. This proactive approach helps ensure timely deliveries and
minimizes delays in therapy, all while reps are on the go. AI can also enable
compliance, such as using built-in guardrails and triggers to prevent
prescription sampling beyond the regulated allotment.

Automating the creation of tailored and secure medical sales emails can
streamline communication with stakeholders such as hospitals, clinics, and
physicians. Whether it's notifying them about new rebates, creating contract
quotes, or following up on a sales visit, this automation frees up valuable
time sales reps typically spend finding information to instead focus on other
critical tasks. Using an assistive agent, reps can ask, “Who are my HCPs with
declining procedures over the past 6 months?” or “Which content and key
messaging should I be using for this call?” to prepare for meetings with
healthcare professionals.

## 3\. More effective patient support programs

Patient services in life sciences encompasses key access and support services
to patients who are currently using a commercially-available product. They are
intended to ensure patients can gain access to medication in a timely fashion
and achieve the best possible clinical outcome and improve adherence to the
prescribed therapies.

Assistive agents can help out busy patient services case managers by [taking
on administrative tasks](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-
intelligence/use-cases/healthcare/outcome-management/) like sending an email
or generating a call script to collect insurance coverage information, out-of-
pocket cost details, and missing patient information to prevent any delays to
treatment. Autonomous agents can send proactive alerts to patient services
teams if there are any potential delays that might result in delayed access to
therapy and optimize scheduling for personalized medicine delivery, ensuring
best possible use of manufacturing slots and clinical outcomes for the
patient.

## Embrace the possibilities of today’s technology

AI for life sciences is transforming the industry landscape, offering powerful
solutions that increase efficiency and enhance patient outcomes. By embedding
AI into your operations, Pharma and MedTech companies can tackle some of the
most pressing challenges and deliver better outcomes for patients.

But this is just the beginning. As AI continues to evolve, its potential to
enhance efficiency, improve outcomes, and create a more patient-centric
healthcare ecosystem is immense. The question isn't whether AI will change
life sciences, but how quickly the industry can embrace its possibilities.

## Meet Life Sciences Cloud

Discover how our compliant, Agentforce-powered platform can help you get life-
enhancing therapies and devices to patients, faster.

[Learn more](https://www.salesforce.com/healthcare-life-sciences/life-
sciences-software/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-one.png)

