---
title: 'What Is an AI Agent For Small Business?'
date: 2024-11-11
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-agent-for-small-business/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Brett Grossfeld']
summary: Check out the many benefits, features, and future of AI assistants for small business owners.
---


Owning a [small or medium-sized business
(SMB)](https://www.salesforce.com/small-business/what-is-an-smb/) is no small
feat. But the right technology, like an artificial intelligence (AI)
assistant, or agent, for small business, can make a world of difference.
Imagine having a digital partner that keeps your tasks on track, boosts your
customer service, and makes daily operations smoother.

Over [58% of SMBs already use
AI](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/) to
streamline their operations and deliver more personalized customer
experiences. A small business AI assistant is more than just a tool — it’s a
partner in your growth. Let’s explore how it can become a vital part of your
business.

### **What we’ll cover:**

  * [What is an AI agent for small business?](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-is-an-ai-agent-for-small-business)
  * [Benefits of using an AI assistant in small businesses](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-benefits-of-using-an-ai-assistant-for-smbs)
  * [Key features of small business AI agents](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-key-features-of-small-business-ai-agents)
  * [Spotlight on Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-spotlight-on-agentforce)
  * [Real-world examples of AI assistants for SMBs](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-real-world-examples-of-ai-assistants-for-smbs)
  * [Challenges and limitations of AI agents](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-challenges-and-limitations-for-ai-agents)
  * [The future of AI assistants in small business](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-the-future-of-ai-assistants-in-small-business)
  * [Take the next step with AI and Salesforce](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-take-the-next-step-with-ai-and-salesforce)

## What is an AI agent for small business?

Think of a small business [agent](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/what-
are-ai-
agents/?d=7013y0000020HBTAA2&nc=7013y0000020IUMAA2&utm_content=7013y0000020HBTAA2&utm_source=google&utm_medium=paid_search&utm_campaign=21746031327&utm_adgroup=167932510533&utm_term=agentforce&utm_matchtype=e&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjw1Yy5BhD-
ARIsAI0RbXZ3hHxcZCr42wfKQx6SN-
hicjSNhqNZFNyg__71t18IZL0Gvqdvr34aArsDEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds) as a smart,
reliable assistant. It handles routine tasks, offers insights from your data,
and helps you connect better with customers. AI assistants use technologies
like [natural language processing
(NLP)](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/natural-
language-processing-basics/get-to-know-natural-language-processing), machine
learning, and predictive analytics to keep operations smooth.

For example, with [Salesforce’s AI-powered customer relationship management
(CRM)](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/ai-crm/) you're getting your customer
data ready to be used by an AI agent. It manages customer inquiries, schedules
meetings, and predicts sales trends. This allows you to focus on what matters
most — growing your business.

##  All things AI for your SMB

[![Astro holds a Small and Medium Business Trends
report](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2020/10/small-business-trends-smb-
research-1.jpg?w=500)](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-
reports/smb-trends/)

### [Small and Medium Business Trends
Report](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/)

[![Illustration showcasing artificial intelligence \(AI\) tools for small
businesses.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/AI-Tools-for-
SMB.png?w=1500)](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-tools-for-small-business/)

#### [AI for Small Business: How to Choose Your Tech Stack  
](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-tools-for-small-business/)

[![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/Screenshot-2024-10-17-at-9.40.54 AM.png?strip=all&quality=95)](https://www.salesforce.com/form/conf/small-
business/ai-guide-for-smbs/)

#### [Your Guide to AI for Small
Business](https://www.salesforce.com/form/conf/small-business/ai-guide-for-
smbs/)

[![Illustration showing AI prompts helping small business
sales](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/TSK-38086_5_AI-
prompts_for_SMB_Sales.png?w=1500)](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-prompts-
for-small-business-sales/)

#### [5 AI Prompts For Small Business
Sales](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-prompts-for-small-business-sales/)

## Benefits of using an AI assistant for SMBs

So, what can an AI assistant for your small business do for you? Here are the
key benefits:

### Increase your efficiency

Automating tasks like scheduling, responding to customer questions, and
managing data saves time. With AI assistants working 24/7, you won’t miss
opportunities, even when you’re off the clock. [85% of SMB sales teams using
AI report better time
management](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/)
and more accurate sales forecasts. Imagine how much easier things could be
with AI by your side.

### Keep costs down

AI helps you reduce the need for extra hands for routine work. It’s a smart
investment that keeps costs down. Over [60% of SMB desk workers already use or
plan to use generative AI](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-
reports/smb-trends/), showing how AI can help you get more done without
needing more staff. The savings can be reinvested in [small business
marketing](https://www.salesforce.com/small-business/marketing/) or new
product development.

### Improve your customer service

AI analyzes customer interactions and responds with personalized messages.
It’s like having a customer service rep who’s always available! In fact, [80%
of customers value their experience with a company as much as the products or
services](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/)
they buy. AI can pick up on changes in a customer’s buying habits and send
them special offers. With [AI assisting you in Small Business
Service](https://www.salesforce.com/small-business/service/), you can deliver
top-notch support.

### Enhance your decision-making

AI provides real-time insights that help you make better decisions. Imagine
seeing which products are trending or knowing which marketing campaigns work
best. [71% of SMB marketing teams use AI to turn data into
action](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/). If
you want to learn more about making data-driven decisions, check out the
[benefits of CRM](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/benefits-of-crm/).

### Scale your small business

As your business expands, your AI assistant grows right alongside it. It
adapts to handle more customers and complex processes. With Salesforce, small
businesses can scale their [CRM for SMB](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/crm-
for-small-business/) and customer service seamlessly.

## Key features of small business AI agents

To get the most out of a small business AI assistant, look for these key
features:

  * **Task automation** : AI assistants handle repetitive tasks like setting up meetings, sending follow-up emails, or managing data entry. [90% of SMB marketing teams use AI to automate customer interactions](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/), giving you more time to focus on building relationships.
  * **Data analytics and reporting** : AI can analyze customer data and offer insights across various analytics, like tracking account activity, identifying key sales opportunities, and pinpointing where leadership support is needed in the sales cycle. In fact, [88% of SMB marketing teams use AI for data integration](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/), gaining a clearer view of customer behavior.
  * **Personalization** : [87% of SMBs use AI for personalized experiences](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/smb-trends/), leading to happier customers. AI tailors customer interactions based on their needs and past behavior. This means delivering messages that resonate, even with hundreds of customers. 
  * **Natural language processing (NLP)** : [NLP](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/natural-language-processing-basics) enables AI to understand and respond to customer questions in a way that feels natural and intuitive. For example, if a customer asks, “When will my order arrive?”, NLP allows the AI to interpret the question and provide a precise answer using the latest tracking information. This makes interactions smoother and more helpful for customers.
  * **Integration** : AI agents work well with your CRM and other tools, making the shift to AI-powered processes smooth. When you connect AI with [Small Business Slack](https://www.salesforce.com/small-business/collaboration/), a messaging platform designed for team communication and collaboration, your team stays connected no matter where they are.

## Spotlight on Agentforce

[Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/) is Salesforce’s AI
assistant, designed for small businesses. It brings AI directly into your
[CRM](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/), automating tasks, analyzing data, and
personalizing customer interactions. Agentforce allows you to have
conversations with your data, making it easier to gain insights and take
action.

Salesforce’s focus on AI goes beyond automation. It’s about building stronger
relationships with customers and making better decisions.

[![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/agentforce_watchlist.webp?w=1920)](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/)

## Real-world examples of AI assistants for SMBs

AI assistants are transforming businesses across various industries. Here’s
how they’re making a difference:

  * **Retail virtual assistants** : [An AI agent for retail](https://www.salesforce.com/retail/) automates inventory management, answers customer questions, and suggests products. Imagine an online store where AI recommends products to shoppers based on their past purchases — no extra staff needed, just better results.
  * **Healthcare AI tools** : [Health and Life Sciences AI assistants](https://www.salesforce.com/news/stories/life-sciences-cloud-ai-availability/) help with scheduling, patient follow-ups, and collecting feedback, freeing up your team to focus on patient care. It streamlines appointment bookings and reminders, leading to better experiences.
  * **Service industry AI solutions** : [AI for customer service](https://www.salesforce.com/service/ai/customer-service-ai/) speeds up response times, and boosts client satisfaction. Whether you’re in real estate, hospitality, or professional services, AI handles inquiries and bookings fast, keeping customers happy.

## Challenges and limitations for AI agents

As you begin this journey into AI agents, there are a few things to keep in
mind:

Getting an AI assistant up and running can take some time, especially when it
comes to training and fitting it into your existing systems. But don’t let
that hold you back. With [Salesforce’s
support](https://www.salesforce.com/small-business/pro-suite/), you’ll have
the right tools and guidance to simplify the process. The focus is on helping
you define clear goals, ensuring compatibility with your current software, and
bringing your team up to speed. This way, you can feel confident about making
AI work for your business from day one.

When AI handles customer data, keeping it safe and following privacy rules is
crucial. Salesforce helps protect sensitive information while letting you make
the most of AI. To explore [data, sales, service, marketing, commerce, and IT
solutions](https://www.salesforce.com/products/), Salesforce has you covered
across any team.

## The future of AI assistants in small business

The landscape of AI in small businesses is evolving rapidly, and it’s an
exciting time for you to get involved. Here’s what you can expect in the near
future:

AI tools are going to get even smarter. They’ll provide deeper insights and
learn to adapt to your unique business needs. Imagine having an assistant that
helps you spot trends before they fully emerge, keeping you one step ahead of
the competition. This is a real opportunity to enhance your decision-making.

As AI technology continues to become more user-friendly and affordable, more
small businesses will start to embrace these tools. The rise of [generative
AI](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/what-is-generative-ai/)
for streamlining operations is already impressive, and the results speak for
themselves. If you’re looking for ways to get started with AI, check out our
guide on [AI for Small Business](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-for-small-
business/).

AI has the potential to open up new avenues for revenue, such as subscription
services or digital products. Many successful businesses are customizing AI
tools to fit their specific needs, which helps them achieve outstanding
results. This could be your chance to rethink your approach and explore
innovative ways to expand. Right now, [small business leaders are strategizing
with AI, data, and CRM](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/small-business-
statistics/), and you are a part of history in the making.

**Ready to get your customer data prepped for AI agents?**

With [Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/small-business/starter/), you’ll
get tools to simplify tasks, build better customer relationships, and grow
your business — no tech expertise needed.

[![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/How-
Agentforce-Works-
Prompt.png?w=1693)](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/what-are-ai-
agents/?d=7013y0000020HBTAA2&nc=7013y0000020IUMAA2&utm_content=7013y0000020HBTAA2&utm_source=google&utm_medium=paid_search&utm_campaign=21746031327&utm_adgroup=167932510533&utm_term=agentforce&utm_matchtype=e&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjw1Yy5BhD-
ARIsAI0RbXZ3hHxcZCr42wfKQx6SN-
hicjSNhqNZFNyg__71t18IZL0Gvqdvr34aArsDEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds)

## Take the next step with AI and Salesforce

AI agents for SMBs are prepping your future — they're partners that help you
grow and streamline your business. By adopting AI, you can automate tasks,
make better decisions, and focus on what matters. [Start your free trial
today](https://www.salesforce.com/eu/form/signup/freetrial-sales-starter/) and
see how Salesforce’s AI tools can take care of the little things — so you have
more time for the big ideas.

