---
title: 'Chatbots vs. AI Agents: What’s the difference?'
date: 2024-11-15
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/chatbots-vs-ai-agents/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Kevin Lada']
summary: 'Learn how chatbots and autonomous AI agents can ease the workload for reps and scale your customer support.'
---


Today’s customers expect swift service without compromising on quality. Our
research finds that [69% of service
reps](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/state-of-service/)
say balancing customer service speed and quality is difficult — down from 76%
in 2022.

Could automated service assistants be easing that pain point? We think so.  
  
Chatbots and AI agents free up customer service reps to focus on more complex
cases that require critical thinking and empathy. An added bonus: They’re both
available around the clock, so customers can receive support any time of the
day or night — even at 3 a.m. in a blizzard.

In this article, we'll discuss chatbots and autonomous agents — breaking down
the differences and helping you choose the right one for your business.

What you’ll learn:

  * [What is a chatbot?](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-is-a-chatbot)
  * [What is an AI agent?](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-is-an-ai-agent)
  * [Comparing chatbots to AI agents](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-comparing-chatbots-to-ai-agents-for-customer-service)
  * [Chatbots vs. AI agents: Which is best for your business?](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-chatbots-vs-ai-agents-which-is-best-for-your-business)

## Dig into our latest customer service research

High-performing organizations are using data, AI, and automation to deliver
faster, more personalized service. Find out how in the 6th State of Service
report.

[Get the free report](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-
reports/state-of-service/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-four.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-four.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-four.png)

# **What is a chatbot?**

[Chatbots](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-service-chatbot/what-
is-a-chatbot/) are software programs designed to mimic human conversation.
They provide a seamless and efficient way to help with routine customer
service tasks, like answering frequently-asked questions and guiding users
through service processes, such as how to update billing information.

Chabots operate within predefined parameters, responding to [specific inputs
and following](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-service-
chatbot/how-to-create/) set rules and scripts. This means that chatbots are
less prepared to handle complex situations outside of those parameters. It
creates a consistent, reliable, and “boxed-in” [customer service
experience](https://www.salesforce.com/service/what-is-customer-service-
experience/). For some businesses, that's the goal. ([Back to
top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#jump-here))

## **What is an AI agent?**

[AI agents](https://www.salesforce.com/service/ai/customer-service-ai/), like
[Agentforce Service Agent](https://www.salesforce.com/form/conf/service-
cloud/agentforce-service-agent-
demo/?leadcreated=true&redirect=true&sfuuid=def406f8-8788-4216-a5ba-724c37549fd9&tid=4d1f49f8-b85e-469d-b95b-be7dabc290c3&d=70130000000sUVq&nc=7013y000002SQ25AAG),
represent a massive leap forward in customer service. These agents deliver
fully automated and intelligent support. [Natural language processing
(NLP)](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/natural-
language-processing-basics) powers ‌AI agents’ ability to understand and
respond to customers in a conversational manner. This mimics human interaction
— and raises the bar on efficiency and personalization in service. It’s no
wonder that [83% of decision
makers](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/state-of-
service/) plan to increase investments in AI over the next year.

Let’s look at what an AI agent can do:

  * **Complex multitasking** — Agents can multitask and manage complex interactions. And unlike chatbots, AI agents can seamlessly handle context switching. If a customer suddenly changes the conversation to a new topic, agents can switch gears to tackle new tasks directed by the customer. 
  * **Deeper conversation** — While chatbots use customer inputs and existing data from your CRM and [knowledge management systems](https://www.salesforce.com/service/what-is-a-knowledge-management-system/) to train a predictive model, AI agents use your data to “ground” prompts sent to a Large Language Model, or LLM, and add greater context to exchanges.
  * **More action**   — Rather than just following a script, agents are able to decide which action is most appropriate based on a customer’s behavior and then complete actions for that customer, such as adding an order or updating a previous transaction. 

AI agents are already automating routine tasks, coordinating workflows, and
facilitating real-time communication for customer service representatives. Our
research finds that [81% of representatives
](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/state-of-
service/)believe customers today expect a more personal touch. Agents offer
more personalized service to meet these growing expectations. ([Back to
top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#jump-here))

## **Comparing chatbots to AI agents for customer service**

While [AI agents](https://www.salesforce.com/form/service-cloud/agentforce-
service-agent-
demo/?d=7013y000002ExaBAAS&nc=7013y000002EyMeAAK&utm_content=7013y000002ExaBAAS&utm_source=google&utm_medium=paid_search&utm_campaign=21746031327&utm_adgroup=167932510533&utm_term=agentforce&utm_matchtype=e&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjwj4K5BhDYARIsAD1Ly2pV7gW21kA69k0RPiAIwkm1Ifm2SyD2O_5jXj828IdHO5zFBSh3PkcaAsyAEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds)
represent the latest in automated customer service, both chatbots and agents
offer a range of possibilities to elevate [customer service
experience](https://www.salesforce.com/service/what-is-customer-service-
experience/) and drive business success. It boils down to the specific needs
of your company. These are unique tools, each with their own use cases. Let’s
take a look at chatbots and AI agents side-by-side in key areas:

### Task handling

Chatbots are best suited for straightforward, repetitive tasks. They excel at
guiding users through simple linear processes such as resetting passwords.  
  
In contrast, AI agents can manage both simple and complex inquiries. They
address nuanced customer issues, offer personalized recommendations, and even
anticipate needs based on past behavior and preferences. This adaptability
makes AI agents uniquely capable of holding non-linear conversations,
delivering personalized service to a whole new level.

### Communication methods

Chatbots are often limited to text-based interactions, although some newer
versions can handle voice commands. AI agents, however, can communicate
through multiple [customer service
channels](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/digital-customer-service-channels/),
including voice, text, and even visual interfaces. This versatility allows
agents to understand a customer’s issues in natural language — on the channel
of their choice — to proactively resolve issues.

### Investment vs. cost

Chatbots operate on predefined scripts. If your chatbot won’t be using
artificial intelligence, like [generative
AI](https://www.salesforce.com/service/ai/customer-service-ai/), the bulk of
your costs are paid upfront to build out the conversational design.  
  
AI agents offer more functionality, manage a wider range of tasks, and
minimize the need for human intervention. They deliver a more personalized
experience. This elevated level of service enhances [customer
satisfaction](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-service-incident-
management/what-is-customer-satisfaction/) and loyalty, ultimately leading to
improved business outcomes and a higher return on investment. It might be a
bigger investment, but you can expect a bigger impact, too.

### Sensitive data and model training

It’s worth considering how data goes into training models for chatbots and
agents. A chatbot’s model is trained using existing data, such as [on-platform
CRM data](https://www.salesforce.com/data/what-is-data-cloud/). An AI agent,
on the other hand, uses an LLM to train its model, helping it learn from large
amounts of non-platform data.

Some AI agents, like
[Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/form/conf/service-cloud/agentforce-
service-agent-
demo/?leadcreated=true&redirect=true&sfuuid=def406f8-8788-4216-a5ba-724c37549fd9&tid=4d1f49f8-b85e-469d-b95b-be7dabc290c3&d=70130000000sUVq&nc=7013y000002SQ25AAG),
offer a built-in trust layer to keep your data safe by streamlining how LLMs
can train models. On occasion, though, customers in regulated industries
decide not to take the risk and simply opt for chatbots trained exclusively
with platform data.

## Meet Agentforce Service Agent

Watch Agentforce Service Agent resolve cases on its own, deliver trusted
answers, engage with customers across channels and seamlessly hand off to
human service reps.

[Watch now](https://www.salesforce.com/form/service-cloud/agentforce-service-
agent-demo/?d=pb)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-three.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-three.png)

### The importance of strategy with AI agents

There are practical considerations to address before using agents. It's not
quite as simple as flipping a switch. To take full advantage of their promise,
your team will need strategic planning and the appropriate resources, such as
[high-quality customer data](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-
service-incident-management/customer-service-analytics/).

Ongoing maintenance and updates, for example, keep AI agents working according
to the latest trends and customer preferences. This maximizes their potential
and can deliver improved efficiency again and again.  ([Back to
top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#jump-here))

## Join the Serviceblazer Community

[Claim your
invite](https://join.slack.com/t/serviceblazer/shared_invite/zt-2l7rqms0k-aNCMcpLWeDtl28ZIbGwhhQ?_ga=2.110781253.1107903344.1725887152-1686849959.1725887152)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-eleven.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-left-layout-eleven.png)

## **Chatbots vs. AI agents: Which is best for your business?**

When deciding between a chatbot and an AI agent, consider these key factors:

  * **Complexity of tasks** — Chatbots are great for handling simple, repetitive tasks and FAQs. AI agents can manage simple and more complex inquiries.
  * **Level of personalization** — If your business requires a high degree of personalization and understanding of customer context, an agent might be the better choice. Chatbots typically offer less personalization as they rely on predefined scripts.
  * **Resource allocation** — Chatbots often require more upfront investment to build out logic and dialogue trees, but savings can follow if they don’t lean on AI. Agents require less upfront costs with the LLM doing the heavy lifting, but the data and integration requirements that enable the AI agent to take action are higher.
  * **Customer expectations** — Do your customers value quick, simple interactions? If so, a chatbot might suffice. If they expect more in-depth, personalized support, an AI agent could be more suitable.
  * **Scalability and flexibility** — Consider the scalability and flexibility of chatbots and AI agents. Both can handle a large volume of inquiries, but agents can adapt to a wider range of situations and even learn from interactions to improve over time.
  * **Long-term strategy** — If you anticipate needing more advanced customer service capabilities in the future, investing in an AI agent now might be a better strategic move. 

Carefully consider your specific needs. Now that you know the difference
between chatbots and AI agents, your business can make an informed decision
that balances immediate needs with long-term goals. Then, you’ll be one step
closer to improving customer service and driving better business outcomes.

There’s a reason companies like
[Salesforce](https://www.salesforce.com/service/) offer both chatbots and AI
agents. It’s because every business is different and automated solutions
aren't one-size-fits-all. Each has different purposes and can even coexist to
provide a more comprehensive and efficient user experience. ([Back to
t](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#jump-
here)[op](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#top))

## Unlock AI with Service Cloud

Your AI is only as strong as the data it's built on. Agentforce Service Agents
are built on trusted, secured data to safely maximize the power of AI.

[Show me how](https://www.salesforce.com/products/service-cloud/)

![Image shows a cloud with a lock in the
sky.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/10/TSK-38072_Enhance_Data_Security_in_Data_Cloud_with_Platform_Encryption.jpg)

