---
title: 'How We Built the First Dreamforce Event Agent in 5 Days with Agentforce'
date: 2024-11-15
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/build-an-ai-agent/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Robert Xue']
summary: 'Robert Xue, a software engineering architect on the Retrieval Augmented Generation team, takes us behind the scenes.'
---


It was Sept. 12, a week before Dreamforce, our biggest event of the year. I
was Slacking at work as usual (no pun intended), when I received a ping from
my manager, Claire Cheng, vice president, software engineering: “Hi, Robert.
We’d like your help on something.”

“Sure,” I replied. “Don’t tell me this is for the Dreamforce keynote, please.
That might be a bit rushed.”

“Not a Dreamforce keynote demo,” she said. “It’s the [Salesforce Events
app](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/salesforce-events/id1021413071). The
Marketing Event Tech team has been working on migrating a homegrown AI agent
to the Agentforce stack since Aug. 26, and we could use your help to add the
retrieval augmented generation
[[RAG](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/what-is-rag/)] feature to it.”

Fast-forward to Sept. 17, the first day of Dreamforce. The Salesforce Events
app, now with an artificial intelligence (AI) agent called Ask Astro, went
live. Ask Astro Agent helped attendees find useful information grounded in our
FAQs, managed user schedules, and recommended sessions to attend based on
factors such as search query, time, meeting summary availability, and session
types.

Here's a video of Ask Astro Agent in action.

![](https://salesforce.vidyard.com/watch/oSJ2BuaUkGPMUDRqjGhQgm)

How did all this happen? Let’s step back to three weeks before Dreamforce to
see how we got started, and how we built the first event agent with our newest
technology in record time.

## **Agentforce onboarding**

The Marketing Event Tech team, led by Software Engineering Architect Amool
Gupta, had already spent a month redefining the user experience of the
Salesforce Events app. In a nutshell, the team wanted an agent to live
natively in the app, and allow it to not only answer users’ questions but help
them manage their schedules by taking actions. The team built the AI agent
using OpenAI function-calling and a vector database in Heroku, and the testing
and tuning effort was daunting, with frequent feature requests and content
updates. This work caught the attention of Salesforce leaders, who challenged
the team to use the full power of Salesforce, and include
[Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/) Service Agent and [Data
Cloud](https://www.salesforce.com/data/) RAG, an AI framework that lets
companies use their structured and unstructured proprietary data to make
generative AI more trusted and relevant.

Challenge accepted. After all, what would be better than using an agent and
RAG in an Agentforce-themed Dreamforce, whose message was “Don’t DIY your AI,
and we’re ready to help you on this journey”?

Agentforce Product Manager Andrew Clauson took the lead in converting the
agent logic into Agentforce configurations. After the vector database calls in
Apex classes were implemented and Apex actions were added, an Ask Astro Agent
with three topics and 12 actions quickly showed up in the system, and began
responding well to test utterances.

From there, the countdown to Dreamforce began.

## Discover Agentforce

Agentforce Agents provide always-on support to employees or customers. Learn
how they can help your company today.

[See the benefits](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-one.png)

## **Minimum viable product: 5 days to Dreamforce**

Implementing RAG always starts with data. We needed to ingest the Dreamforce
session data to Data Cloud once, and see if we could create a minimum viable
product (MVP) to replicate the current status of Ask Astro using the Data
Cloud tech stack. We had a file dump of `all-dreamforce-sessions.csv` in my
team’s Slack channel canvas — a perfect starting point.

### **Data**

There are probably a hundred ways to import data into Data Cloud. I stuck with
my
[favorite](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.c360_a_create_custom_dmo_from_csv.htm&type=5):
creating a data model directly from CSV. This didn’t take long compared to
creating a custom object in core, uploading it using CSV, and manipulating all
the permission sets.

### **Search index**

Next, I created a vector index using Data Cloud’s [unstructured data semantic
search](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.c360_a_search_index_vector_index.htm&type=5),
and headed out for a meal break. When I returned, the vector index was already
waiting for me.

### **RAG**

Setup was easy; the harder part was retrieving data and feeding it to the
agent. When I began this task, the agent was already integrated with the
prebuilt homegrown vector database solution via API, and our lead architect
had already written an Apex class to use the Heroku API, thus exposing that as
an agent action.

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/NEWimage2.png?strip=all&quality=95)

While I’m the engineering architect for Retriever, a no-code solution that
grounds your prompt template with semantic data in Data Cloud, the feature
sets we were working on hadn’t yet arrived at the production environment that
Ask Astro Agent runs on. So, I had to write an Apex class to use our[ query-
service](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-
us.c360a_api.meta/c360a_api/c360a_api_query_v2_call_overview.htm) connect API
directly. It took me about 30 minutes to implement the Apex class using our
Apex code-generation LLM and to create a `Robert Test` Agent that replicated
the topic instructions and all the other actions from the `Ask Astro` Agent,
but replaced the  `retrieverSessions` action with
`retrieveSessions_DataCloud`.

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/NEWimage3.png?strip=all&quality=95)

### **MVP**

Our MVP was done. I asked the new agent for `Marc Benioff’s sessions on
Tuesday` and verified it was searching for the right topic (`Session
management`) and action selection (`Retrieve Sessions from DataCloud`), and
passing the right parameters to my Apex class (searchTerm = “Marc Benioff”,
startsBetween represents Tuesday). The sessions were currently in UTC time,
and I wasn’t ready to support time zones yet, but they seemed to need only
minor polishing. I posted in Slack, “MVP ready for test,” and called it a day.

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/NEWimage5.png?strip=all&quality=95)

## **Hybrid search and augmented index: 4 days to Dreamforce**

I woke up in the morning, and saw feedback from my teammates in Slack about
how the bot was 80% there already. Our product manager had fixed the time zone
issue by working some prompt magic into the action descriptions.

**IMAGE 6**

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/NEWimage6-crop.png?strip=all&quality=95)

Looks like we nailed the project in merely half a day, right? Now I only had
to improve the speaker name accuracy so when someone searched for “Adam
Evans,” we wouldn’t return a session for another Adam, Adams, or Evans.

Optimizing name searches was way harder than I thought, though — partly
because the speaker name was only a small part of the session information that
was being vectorized, and there were a lot of speakers named Adam or Adams.
Vector search alone wasn’t going to cut it.

Fortunately, our Search team came to rescue. [Hybrid
search](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.c360_a_hybridsearch_index.htm&type=5)
was available as a beta feature in Data Cloud, and it was a big help. While
vector search understands semantic similarities and context, it lacks specific
domain vocabulary. Keyword search, on the other hand, excels at lexical
similarity but not semantic similarity. Hybrid search offers the best of both
worlds, combining the strength of semantically aware vector search with the
precision and speed of keyword search.

I also threw in an improvement that our team was working on called augmented
indexing, where we break down large amounts of data into smaller, more
manageable chunks, each  containing information optimized for a particular
type of query — in this case, “search by speaker name.”  
  
It was easier than it sounds: All I had to do was derive all the speaker
information from our session data, and create one chunk for each speaker that
looked like `Adam Evans, SVP, AI Platform Cloud, Salesforce`. This type of
chunk would get a very high keyword score and an okay vector score when the
incoming query was `Adam Evans` or variations  of it, like `Adm Evens`. When
these augmented chunks were matched, we returned the full session information
to the LLM for RAG.

## **The future is well architected**

Learn how the Salesforce Well-Architected framework can help you build
solutions that are trusted, easy, and adaptable. Preview the latest
innovations directly from the people who built them.

[Watch the
keynote](https://www.salesforce.com/plus/experience/Dreamforce_2024/series/architects_at_dreamforce_2024/episode/episode-s1e2)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-four.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-four.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-four.png)

## **Streaming services: 3 days to Dreamforce**

Since our testing partners were happy with the optimized search index, we
moved on to the next stage: periodically**** refreshing the search index to
sync with updated session schedules and speaker bios. Data Cloud search index
supports streaming updates out of the box, which means any change to your
related data stream will be synced to the search index in near real time. The
challenge was, how could we add recurring refreshing logic to feed updates to
this pipeline?  
  
Software Engineer Lakshmi Siva Kallam joined the Slack channel; his team had
piloted with Mulesoft to bring[ Ingestion
API](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.c360_a_ingestion_api.htm&type=5)
and[ Anypoint
Connector](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.c360_a_mulesoft.htm&type=5)
into Data Cloud. I wrote some Java code to convert our vendor’s session API
output into the desired format (the LLM helped me to do this in 45 minutes —
that’s a lot of Json processing). Then, Lakshmi built the recurring data-
ingestion pipeline with support for change-data capturing in[ Mulesoft
Anypoint studio](https://www.mulesoft.com/platform/studio), and deployed it as
a new data stream. We created a new index, removed some speakers from the
vendor system, and added ourselves as a test speaker. We waited a few minutes
and then searched for our name. And it worked.

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/NEWimage7.png?strip=all&quality=95)

## **Knowledge action: 2 days to Dreamforce**

Inspired by the success of the session-data indexing, we convinced our senior
leaders that we could host the entire Ask Astro experience on the new
Agentforce/Data Cloud RAG ecosystem. We got the green light to further convert
FAQ spreadsheets into knowledge articles, and used our [Answer Questions with
Knowledge](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.copilot_actions_ref_answer_questions_with_knowledge.htm&type=5)
action to surface the FAQ responses. This meant that the Marketing Event Tech
team could use the native Salesforce Lighting Knowledge interface to manage
versions of FAQ articles, and use a Rebuild Index button to trigger the
rebuild of our agent’s knowledge base.

## **Roll out: 1 day to Dreamforce**

Testing, FAQ content updates, and small prompt adjustments continued
throughout the day across all workstreams. With LLM-powered agents and our
Agent Builder, the debugging cycle was as short as 30 seconds. Near the end of
the day, the moment finally arrived: We got the green light to ship the Data
Cloud version of Ask Astro Agent to our colleagues, and to Dreamforce
attendees on the following day.

Here’s the data flow for Ask Astro Agent when it went online.

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/NEWimage8.png?strip=all&quality=95)

## **Monitoring at Dreamforce  **

By turning on[ Einstein
feedback](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.generative_ai_feedback.htm&type=5),
we were able to track how attendees were interacting with Ask Astro Agent, and
understand where to improve our FAQ. We’ll also use the feedback to improve
the agent for the next Salesforce event like World Tour or TDX.

## **Takeaways**

We migrated a homegrown AI application from an open-source stack to a
Salesforce stack in a matter of days, using all the latest technology that
Agentforce and Data Cloud have to offer:

  * Mulesoft Anypoint Studio
  * Data Cloud Ingestion API
  * DLO => DMO mapping
  * Vector/hybrid index in Data Cloud with augmented chunks
  * Query service in Data Cloud enhanced with Hybrid Search re-ranker
  * Atlas Reasoning Engine
  * Answer Questions with Knowledge action
  * Agent Builder
  * Invocable action framework to update user schedule
  * Bot API to connect agent with mobile application
  * Einstein feedback

Along the way, we improved configurability, debugging ability, and most
importantly, productivity, in ways that an open source stack can’t match.
You’ll definitely see a more powerful Ask Astro Agent at our [next
event](https://www.salesforce.com/events/).

## How the Atlas Reasoning Engine powers Agentforce

Autonomous, proactive AI agents are at the heart of Agentforce. But how do
they work? Let’s look under the hood.

[Learn how it works](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/what-is-a-
reasoning-engine/atlas/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-five.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-five.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-five.png)

