---
title: 'We Design AI Interfaces with Accessibility in Mind – Here’s How'
date: 2024-11-08
categories: [{'term': 'design', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}]
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/design-ai-interfaces-accessibility/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Jacqueline Tolisano']
summary: 'Discover 3 best practices that help keyboard users interact with Agentforce and Prompt Builder.'
---


When we design AI interfaces, we always ask: [Can I do it with a keyboard
alone?](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/keyboard-accessibility/) There are
many ways to navigate beyond solely using a mouse. Some people are supported
by a head wand, a switch control, or another assistive device to operate their
computer. For these tools to work, each needs keyboard access. Knowing this,
we all have a responsibility to address accessibility barriers and design
inclusive products.

Our team asked this keyboard question when we designed our conversational AI
assistant, [Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/).

Throughout the process, we prioritized accessible design standards. The
[Product Accessibility and Inclusive Design
(PAID)](https://www.salesforce.com/company/intentional-innovation/product-
accessibility-inclusive-design/) team focused on best practices for alternate
navigation, chat notifications, and button labels. Today, we’re sharing how
the application of these concepts led to a more usable product.

### What you’ll learn

  * [What is an accessibility barrier?](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-is-an-accessibility-barrier)
  * [Best Practice 1: Design AI interfaces with alternate navigation paths ](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-best-practice-1-design-ai-interfaces-with-alternate-navigation-paths)
  * [Best Practice 2: Announce when chat responses appear](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-best-practice-2-announce-when-chat-responses-appear)
  * [Best Practice 3: Clearly label additional information](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-best-practice-3-clearly-label-additional-information)

## What is an accessibility barrier?

[An accessibility barrier](https://www.ada.gov/resources/web-guidance/)
prohibits people from accessing services and information. In the physical
world, a building entrance that has stairs but doesn’t have a ramp is an
example of an accessibility barrier. It limits entry for lots of people. Ramps
help those with wheelchairs, strollers, and delivery handcarts, or folks with
low vision or limited mobility who prefer an alternative to the elevation
changes of each narrow stair.

Good design benefits everyone. Similarly, in the digital world, AI interfaces
without key accommodations can exclude users.

We want to avoid barriers as we design the newest user interfaces: chat
layouts for [AI assistants](https://www.salesforce.com/einsteincopilot).

Chats often include an open text field and a vertical stream of responses in a
side panel. So what are the interaction points in this design? We think about
users who navigate with a mouse, voice dictation, or assistive technology such
as a screen reader. It’s critical that the AI interface is free of obstacles
for keyboard users. Otherwise, it’s a [mismatched
interaction](https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262539487/mismatch/).

> Mismatches create a huge barrier to many users with disabilities
>
> Stephanie Louraine

Salesforce Lead Digital Accessibility Engineer

  * [ ](http://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.salesforce.com%2Fblog%2Fdesign-ai-interfaces-accessibility%2F%3Futm_source%3DLinkedIn%26utm_medium%3Dorganic_social%26utm_campaign%3Dus_cbaw%26utm_content%3Dblog-ctt&title=We%20Design%20AI%20Interfaces%20with%20Accessibility%20in%20Mind%20%E2%80%93%20Here%E2%80%99s%20How)
  * [ ](https://x.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20Design%20AI%20Interfaces%20with%20Accessibility%20in%20Mind%20%E2%80%93%20Here%E2%80%99s%20How&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.salesforce.com%2Fblog%2Fdesign-ai-interfaces-accessibility%2F%3Futm_source%3DTwitter%26utm_medium%3Dorganic_social%26utm_campaign%3Dus_cbaw%26utm_content%3Dblog-ctt&via=salesforce)
  * [ ](https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.salesforce.com%2Fblog%2Fdesign-ai-interfaces-accessibility%2F%3Futm_source%3DFacebook%26utm_medium%3Dorganic_social%26utm_campaign%3Dus_cbaw%26utm_content%3Dblog-ctt)
  * 

“Mismatches create a huge barrier to many users with disabilities,” said
Stephanie Louraine, Salesforce Lead Digital Accessibility Engineer. “For
example, those who have motor impairments can have limited use of a mouse or
pointer device. Additionally, blind or low-vision users who use a screen
reader interact with interfaces using a keyboard.”

As part of the [PAID](https://www.salesforce.com/company/intentional-
innovation/product-accessibility-inclusive-design/) team, Louraine provides
integrative accessibility support to our AI design and development teams. The
result is ethical and inclusive AI experiences.

[Accessible design](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/accessible-app-design/) is
essential. We can’t leave best practices behind in the age of AI.

##  Start with AI Copilot Basics

[![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/06/Screenshot-2024-11-08-at-1.19.03 PM.png?strip=all&quality=95)](https://www.salesforce.com/plus/experience/Dreamforce_2024/series/agentforce_&_data_cloud_at_dreamforce_2024/episode/episode-s1e27)

### [Watch the Agentforce
Keynote](https://www.salesforce.com/plus/experience/Dreamforce_2024/series/agentforce_&_data_cloud_at_dreamforce_2024/episode/episode-s1e27)

[![](https://res.cloudinary.com/hy4kyit2a/f_auto,fl_lossy,q_70/learn/modules/generative-
ai-
basics/0248fd867bc9e6f03b0562e4e43f2595_badge.png)](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/generative-
ai-basics)

#### [Trail: Get Ready for
Agentforce](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/trails/get-ready-
for-agentforce)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/04/accessible_apps_design.png?w=889&h=500)

#### [New to Accessible App Design? Start
Here](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/accessible-app-design/)

[![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2023/07/3_tips_kholmes.png?w=889&h=500)](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/tips-
to-design-with-generative-ai)

#### [3 Tips to Design Trusted Generative
AI](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/tips-to-design-with-generative-ai/)

[Back to top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-
you-ll-learn)

## Best Practice 1: Design AI interfaces with alternate navigation paths

To be [operable](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/intro.html),
interfaces need [multiple
ways](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/multiple-ways.html) to
complete a task. Our team considered this in the selection-menu design for
[Prompt Builder](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/prompt-
builder/).

First, let’s talk about where this menu lives.

![A screenshot of Prompt Builder with an orange square highlighting the
Resource selection area.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/06/Resource-
picker.png?strip=all&quality=95)Select Resources in the top field, labeled “2”
above.

Say you’re using Agentforce to get more done in the flow of work. Our
customers ask their AI assistant for instructions, custom close plans, and
answers to common questions. They might start their day with a prompt like,
“summarize this account and show me the highlights.”

Prompt Builder enables anyone to customize and create prompts to use in
Agentforce. To [ground the
prompt](https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=sf.prompt_builder_ground_template.htm&type=5)
— or add context to it — there are a few steps. It includes selecting
resources such as [customer relationship management
(CRM)](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/) data.

Designing alternate navigation paths matters at every interaction point. It's
even important for the selection menu.

In Prompt Builder, keyboard users can select CRM data to ground their prompts.

If users need a mouse to select their CRM data, then keyboard users can't
complete that task. Today, they can complete this step thanks to custom
scripting, [labels](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/att_global_tabindex.asp),
and [tab navigation](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/att_global_tabindex.asp).

Including different ways to complete a task increases user success. This also
applies to our design for Copilot’s chat interface.

[Back to top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-
you-ll-learn)

## Best Practice 2: Announce when chat responses appear

In all user experiences — especially ones involving fast-moving AI —
communications need to be timely and detailed. Typically there are visual cues
for generative AI chat responses. However, sight-based cues alone aren’t
enough. All designs need to be
[perceivable](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/intro.html) to screen
reader users, too.

Screen reader users rely on their software to announce status changes. When
Agentforce responds to a prompt, it notifies the screen reader. The AI
assistant also communicates if it needs time to process, takes an action, or
gets an error.

![Someone typing in an Einstein Copilot chat on their
laptop](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/06/360Blog_CoPilot_5Cases.jpg?strip=all&quality=95)Agentforce
notifies screen readers when it displays a response.

To achieve this, our designers and developers marked the chat as a live
region. The screen reader looks for new text and announces new content.

When communications are clear and frequent, keyboard users can take action.

[Back to top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-
you-ll-learn)

## Best Practice 3: Clearly label additional information

It’s frustrating when a screen reader announces the word “button” without more
information. This can create confusion for users who are still learning how to
use generative AI products.

Agentforce announces each button’s function to screen readers. For example:
our labels differentiate a “more information button” from a "close button.”

![A screenshot of the Einstein Copilot panel with the logo, the word
"Einstein", an information button, pin icon and close
button.](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/06/blue-info-button.jpg?strip=all&quality=95)The
i button in the circle above is announced as “more information button."

It helped that the team used [Lightning
components](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/component-
library/overview/components) from the [Salesforce Lightning Design
System](https://www.lightningdesignsystem.com/). Each component has
[accessibility
guidelines](https://www.lightningdesignsystem.com/accessibility/overview/)
built in.

“Lightning components provide a consistent and accessible experience,” said
Karen Herr, Salesforce Accessibility Foundations Director. Herr relied on
these tools to answer the question: [Can I do it with a keyboard
alone](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/accessible-app-design/)?

[Back to top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-
you-ll-learn)

## Design AI Interfaces for All

Our commitment to accessible design ensures that keyboard users can complete
critical tasks. Everyone should be able to ground prompts in CRM data,
recognize Agentforce ‌responses, and find more information. It’s part of why
users trust our AI assistant.

It’s all possible because our team relies on accessible design best practices.
Alternate navigation, chat notifications, and button labels are necessary for
AI interfaces. This helps ensure that the benefits of the AI revolution are
accessible to everyone.

Get to know [Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/) today.

[Back to top](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/category/ai/feed/?bc=HL#h-what-
you-ll-learn)

