---
title: 'How Turtle Bay Resort Elevated Its Guest Experience with Salesforce Partners and AI'
date: 2024-11-13
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/how-turtle-bay-resort-elevated-its-guest-experience-with-salesforce-partners-and-ai/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Lauren Gaskill']
summary: Turtle Bay Resort has been the backdrop for blockbuster hits such as Forgetting Sarah Marshall, Jumanji, Hunger Games: Catching Fire, and Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. But recently, the resort, which&#8230;
---


Turtle Bay Resort has been the [backdrop for blockbuster
hits](https://www.turtlebayresort.com/blog/six-steamy-scenes-filmed-turtle-
bay-resort) such as _Forgetting Sarah Marshall, Jumanji, Hunger Games:
Catching Fire, and Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides_. But recently,
the resort, which boasts 1,300 acres of pristine Hawaiian paradise, has also
become the scene for a guest experience as thrilling as those films, thanks to
a powerful digital transformation. In the last year, through [partnering with
Salesforce](https://www.salesforce.com/customer-stories/turtle-bay-delivers-
better-experiences-AI/) and [consulting partner
Thunder,](https://appexchange.salesforce.com/appxConsultingListingDetail?listingId=a0N3u00000MRrcuEAD)
they improved so many aspects of the resort experience that guest engagement
increased by 40%. Guests could relax in nature even more thanks to the
technology quietly ensuring efficiency in the background.

### Digital transformation for in-person activities

Why did Turtle Bay decide to undergo a digital transformation? Across
industries, customer expectations are rising. In a recent Salesforce Research
survey across 14,300 consumers and business buyers globally, it was found that
[80% of customers](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/articles/customer-
expectations/) expect better experiences. For example, it’s easier to chat
with a 24/7 virtual concierge than wait for a phone call back during business
hours. Customers desire and expect to experience fewer inconveniences where
technology is concerned, even on vacation.

## Say hello to Data Cloud

The only data platform native to the world's #1 AI CRM.

[Get Started](https://www.salesforce.com/data/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-one.png)

“When you are in hospitality you need to deliver life-changing moments. I knew
I had to partner with someone who could lead me on that journey, providing an
entire view of the customer under a single pane of glass. When I saw what 360
and Data Cloud could do together…it made total sense for our business. I knew
integrating that into our business process would be life changing for the
client.” – Robert Marusi, former CCO, Turtle Bay Resort

Along with its picturesque landscape, [Turtle
Bay](https://www.turtlebayresort.com/) offers golfing, surf lessons, horseback
riding, helicopter rides, and a myriad of other luxe outdoor activities. Each
of these is made up of many small considerations and tasks. Running these
operations was made smoother and more efficient with a digital redesign. When
a guest decides to visit the surfing school, the customer experience covers
all their needs, from booking the surfing lesson to returning their towels.
The staff sees a guest’s booked activities and prior conversations listed in
the Salesforce platform. Then GenAI takes those items and makes intelligent
recommendations of follow-up experiences or services that the staff can then
recommend.

![4 people horseback riding on the beach ](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/turtle-bay-excursions-horses.jpg?w=1600)

### Partner with purpose to drive customer and business outcomes

To understand Turtle Bay’s needs and identify relevant challenges, Thunder
lived on-site and saw the full experience. They built a relationship anchored
in trust and prepared for the long-haul.

After those initial meetings, Thunder led the Turtle Bay staff through a
series of exercises to ensure they would get the most value out of their
products based on their vision, challenges, and goals. Brainstorming and
vision mapping are two of the methods they employed before deciding on a [CRM
strategy](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/what-is-crm/building-crm-
strategies/). But choosing and integrating the right technology is only half
the battle.

Understanding your customer is the real key to determining the right strategy
and driving favorable outcomes. And a great way to determine that strategy is
to have a trusted expert join you on the journey. Here are some of the
challenges Thunder identified for Turtle Bay:

  * Limited personalization capabilities restricted tailored guest experiences
  * Legacy software wouldn’t pair with newer systems
  * Existing data was contained in a messy and seldom-used tech stack

“We knew what was important to [Turtle Bay]: dreamscape, passion, enjoyment,
and guest experience. And we took the technology and matched it to that. The
vision map was really a way for us to understand what they really wanted and
what tech fit into that vision,” says Chris Beukenkamp, VP of Data Solutions
at Thunder.

## Orchestrate excellent customer journeys

Give your guests the experiences they expect with Salesforce.

[Explore Hospitality
](https://www.salesforce.com/solutions/industries/transportation-
hospitality/hospitality/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-one.png)

### People are agents of organizational change

Determining organizational change often starts at the top. Adopting new ways
of working and implementing processes happen throughout every level of the
business. Once Thunder and Turtle Bay agreed on the strategy, Thunder
showcased their expertise upfront and helped the entire team understand what
this technology could accomplish.

“Bringing in a diverse range of voices from Thunder, Salesforce, and within
our business really helped us accomplish everything we set out to do. It’s
important to get opinions and buy-in from everyone — whether they are an
executive or mid-level manager.” – Robert Marusi, former CCO, Turtle Bay
Resort

One challenge they faced during implementation revolved around buy-in and
agility. Marusi noted, “The agility piece was challenging — technology is
moving at a rapid pace, but executive buy-in was much slower. I had to find
the agile, early adopters to move things forward. Getting everyone onboard
with education was tough.” Thunder took a hands-on approach to helping spread
adoption, including more in-person workshops to drive speedy success.

![Turtle bay resort pools](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2024/11/turtle-bay-resort-pool.png?w=1600)

### The perfect thunderstorm

Thunder’s commitment to solidifying organizational support, advanced planning,
and finding the right technology made the difference in this digital
transformation. In the case of Turtle Bay, employing the right technology
meant pairing many products from the [Salesforce Customer 360
platform](https://www.salesforce.com/ap/blog/what-is-salesforce-
customer-360/), including Data Cloud and [AI
solutions](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/). Here’s how
that technology led to real, tangible change for the company and their
customers:

  * Building out a custom propensity AI model to share guest preferences led to a 20% increase in booking conversions
  * Implementing segment GPT capabilities for Marketing Cloud led to a 40% increase in customer engagement
  * Funneling guest data into Data Cloud led to a 50% improvement in concierge efficiency — achieved through integration with AppExchange partner app, [Hapi Guest for Salesforce](https://appexchange.salesforce.com/appxListingDetail?listingId=a0N3A00000EJf3JUAT)

### Digital transformations with Salesforce partners

Turtle Bay Resort’s journey from a picturesque film location to a digitally
transformed hospitality leader illustrates the power of blending natural
beauty with cutting-edge technology. Partnering with Thunder and integrating
the Salesforce Customer 360 platform made a lasting difference in their
business strategy. They’ve been able to significantly enhance guest
experiences and operational efficiency.

This transformation not only met the rising expectations of modern travelers,
but also paved the way for future technological growth. The resort’s success
underscores the importance of strategic partnerships, understanding customer
needs, and embracing technological advancements to create memorable, seamless
experiences. As Turtle Bay continues to evolve, it’s a testament to how
technology can enrich even the most idyllic of settings.

“If you have the vision of what you want the customer experience to be, you
can build your full model after that inspiration,” says Chris Beukenkamp, VP
of Data Solutions at Thunder. “And as a Salesforce partner, we’re here to help
with that every step of the way.”

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-cloud-layout-astro.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-background-layout-astro.png)

## Innovate the Salesforce Way

Learn methods to transform your customer experience and foster innovation at
your company.

[Visit
Trail](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/trails/innovation_salesforce_way)

+1,500 points

Trail

Innovate the Salesforce Way

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-foreground-layout-astro.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/related-trail-parks-layout-astro.png)

