---
title: '8 Contact Center Automation Trends to Watch for in 2025'
date: 2024-10-30
categories: []
url: https://www.salesforce.com/blog/contact-center-automation-trends/
company: Salesforce
authors: ['Zoe Sitrin']
summary: 'From autonomous AI agents to voice AI, these are the top 8 trends to help you improve your contact center performance now and beyond.'
---


Customers today want personalized, efficient service, and they don’t have time
to wait around. In fact, our research finds that a whopping [78% of service
reps](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/state-of-
service/?bc=OTH) say customers seem more rushed. So how can you speed things
up and still deliver a quality experience?

This is where [AI](https://www.salesforce.com/artificial-intelligence/what-is-
ai/)-powered [contact center
automation](https://www.salesforce.com/service/contact-center/automation/)
comes into play to help your team work more quickly and efficiently, all while
focusing their attention on the customer. It encompasses everything from
automating service workflows to making
[voice](https://www.salesforce.com/service/call-center-integration/) a digital
channel to adopting autonomous AI service agents — and much more. It’s
important now and will only become more so as we move into the future, as AI
changes the way we work and ultimately, what customers expect from support
teams.  
  
Let’s zoom in on eight major contact center automation trends that are already
making waves in customer service and are set to get even bigger in 2025 and
beyond.

## Turn your contact center into a revenue generator

Discover how contact center leaders are using AI and a complete view of
customer data to deliver effortless service at scale.

[Get the free guide](https://www.salesforce.com/form/service-cloud/contact-
center-guide/?d=pb)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-four.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-four.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-four.png)

## 8 contact center automation trends for 2025

AI-powered [customer service
automation](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-service-automation/)
is already delivering increased efficiency and customer satisfaction in the
[contact center](https://www.salesforce.com/service/contact-center/) today,
and will continue to transform how contact centers operate into the future.
Let’s dive into some of these exciting AI innovations:

### 1\. Autonomous AI agents

These AI-powered agents work directly with customers to help them resolve
their issues. Unlike the chatbots of the past, which worked through rules and
pre-programmed scenarios, [autonomous
agents](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/autonomous-agents/) like
Salesforce’s [Agentforce](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/) Service
Agent understand the context and intent behind a customer’s inquiry. They use
advanced AI technology like [natural language processing
(NLP)](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/natural-
language-processing-basics) to parse what a customer has said, and can respond
in a context-appropriate, conversational manner, and come up with a plan to
help. [AI agents](https://www.salesforce.com/agentforce/what-are-ai-agents/)
act as independent members of your team, deflecting cases from ever reaching a
service rep or seamlessly handing off conversations to your contact center
reps when an inquiry is out of scope. Note: autonomous AI agents are a
technological leap forward and actually replace chatbots.

### 2\. **Assistive AI agents**

These AI-powered agents act as personal assistants to your service reps. For
example, before jumping into a call a service rep might ask an assistive AI
agent like Agentforce to summarize a customer’s most recent conversation with
the support team. The assistive agent can spin up a quick summary, whether the
conversation occurred between the customer and a different service rep or the
customer and an autonomous AI agent. At the end of the interaction, the
assistive agent can also generate a summary of the case, saving the service
rep time.

### 3\. Enhanced insights

AI is changing how supervisors monitor and manage the contact center. For
example, with AI-generated summaries, supervisors can get up to speed on an
ongoing conversation – whether it’s between a customer and a service rep or a
customer and an AI agent – before jumping in to help. Or, contact center
managers might ask Agentforce for [contact center
analytics](https://www.salesforce.com/service/contact-center/call-center-
analytics/). They can get answers fast to direct questions like “How is my
contact center performing today?” Or, “How many customers are on calls right
now? What’s the average hold time? What’s the channel mix right now?”
Agentforce quickly scans the data and serves up relevant stats.

## See Agentforce Service Agent in action

Deflect and resolve customer cases 24/7 with Agentforce Service Agent —
powered by generative AI.

[Watch the demo](https://www.salesforce.com/form/service-cloud/agentforce-
service-agent-demo/?d=pb)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-one.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-one.png)

### 4\. **Customer feedback management**

[Customer feedback](https://www.salesforce.com/service/contact-center/what-is-
customer-feedback-management/) is essential for improving your products,
services and customer experience. AI automates the otherwise time-consuming
process of collecting and analyzing customer feedback across channels and
surveys.  
  
With [Salesforce Feedback
Management](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-service-
operations/feedback-management/), you can save time building and translating
engaging surveys with AI survey generation and translation customized to your
goals and audience. Salesforce’s [Customer Experience
Intelligence](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-service-operations/)
helps you analyze customer sentiment across service interactions and feedback
surveys to quickly understand what topics, products, service issues, or team
members drive customer sentiment in a positive or negative direction.
Agentforce can quickly summarize sentiment data for you, by customer, theme,
or channel. It can also draft responses for service reps, based on past closed
cases, so that your team can address feedback as quickly as possible.  
  
You can get ahead of customer churn with enhanced case prioritization based on
negative sentiment. Plus, service reps get visibility into historical customer
sentiment right in the console and AI-generated summaries of the customer's
most recent feedback survey. This helps them put the current interaction into
context and personalize their response.

### 5\. Voice AI

The phone may be an old school customer service channel, but that doesn’t mean
you can’t ask AI to help your service reps work more efficiently and
personalize phone calls. When you integrate**** voice into the Salesforce
platform and make it a digital channel, you get real-time call transcription
that frees up your contact center to focus on the customer instead of on
taking notes. Given that [phone is still the most popular
channel](https://www.salesforce.com/service/call-center-integration/), AI can
really accelerate the way your contact center responds to calls. And just as
with any other channel, Agentforce creates conversation summaries after the
call.

### 6\. Knowledge management

[Knowledge base articles](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/how-to-write-a-
knowledge-base-article/) have long been an important tool for both support
teams and customers. Service reps use them to help solve cases, and customers
can access them on your self-service sites. With AI coming to the fore,
knowledge articles now have an additional function: they help train your AI!
You can make your AI-generated content more accurate and specific to your
organization by connecting your AI model to trusted sources of information
like your knowledge base. This process is known as [AI
grounding](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/ai-grounding/).

To answer all of your customers’ questions, you’ll need to incorporate
knowledge from sources across your organization. For example, you may have
relevant support procedures documented in PDFs in Google Drive, product
documentation in Confluence, and even key information on your website. Thanks
to [Unified
Knowledge](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/unified-
knowledge-quick-look/get-started-with-unified-knowledge), you can capture all
of this information in [Salesforce](https://www.salesforce.com/crm/), and
enable it for generative AI grounding. You can even use Agentforce to draft
the first version of a new knowledge article! Of course, always have service
reps review and edit any AI-generated article.

## Join the Serviceblazer Community on Slack

[Here's your invite](http://serviceblazer.slack.com)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-ten.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-left-layout-ten.png)

### 7\. Omni-channel routing

Customers expect you to meet them where they prefer to be served – whether
that’s the phone, SMS, [WhatsApp](https://www.salesforce.com/service/contact-
center/whatsapp-for-customer-service/), or another option. Service Cloud’s
[omni-channel routing](https://www.salesforce.com/service/contact-center/)
allows you to automatically route cases from any channel to the right rep
based on skill set, availability, or capacity. When you use Salesforce
[customer service management software](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/why-we-
chose-salesforce-vs-servicenow/), your team has all the context it needs,
regardless of the channel the customer chooses. ** **

### 8\. Automated service workflows

If your service reps are repeating tedious manual processes all day long,
we’ve got great news: you can make this better with [service
workflows](https://www.salesforce.com/compare/salesforce-vs-servicenow/)!
Loads of customer service processes are prime candidates for [automation with
customer service workflows](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/customer-service-
automation-workflow-map/). You can use workflows to automate both simple and
complex tasks. Eliminating manual steps saves time and boosts productivity.
What’s not to like?

## How to prepare for contact center automation

If you’d like to get started with contact center automation, there are a few
things you need to do first to lay the groundwork.

  1. **Develop a digital strategy.** What are the channels that you currently offer, and how do your customers feel about this? Would your business benefit from offering more channels, or different ones? Do you want your customers to be able to share visual data like photographs? Would you like to offer asynchronous messaging – meaning customers can start a conversation, and come back to it later? Also, does your voice channel offer real-time transcription, so that it can process data and use AI just like a digital customer service channel? In general, you can’t go wrong with [digital customer service channels](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/digital-customer-service-channels/). Our research shows that [53% of customers](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/state-of-the-connected-customer/) prefer to engage digitally. Plus, digital service is a prerequisite for many contact center automations.
  2. **Set up self-service.** Our research finds that [61% of customers](https://www.salesforce.com/resources/research-reports/state-of-the-connected-customer/) would rather use self-service for simple issues. [Self-service channels](https://www.salesforce.com/service/customer-self-service/what-is-customer-self-service/) – your help center (also known as your knowledge base), customer portal, and customer community – meet this need. They help you deflect simple cases from your service reps, who can then focus on more complex work. And they’re also needed for automation – as discussed above, knowledge in particular is essential.
  3. **Tidy up your knowledge base.** Already have knowledge in place? If so, it may be that your knowledge articles need a glow-up. Take the time to prune duplicative articles and update those that need it. This is the first step before relying on your knowledge base to serve a key role in many contact center automations. 

Contact center automation is exciting, and brings the opportunity to boost
efficiency and productivity, and achieve cost savings. Why not get started
today?

## Maximize contact center ROI

Your contact center should be a modern, omnichannel engagement center that
both agents and customers love. Learn how to maximize ROI with contact center
software built into your CRM, powered by AI and automation.

[Show me how](https://www.salesforce.com/products/contact-center/)

![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-illustration-layout-five.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-accent-layout-five.png)
![](https://www.salesforce.com/blog/wp-content/themes/salesforce-
blog/dist/images/offer-block/offer-cloud-layout-five.png)

