---
title: 'Africa’s AI researchers are ready for takeoff'
date: 2024-11-12
categories: [{'term': 'Artificial intelligence', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'App', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'The Algorithm', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}]
url: https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/11/12/1095614/africas-ai-researchers-are-ready-for-takeoff/
company: TechnologyReview
authors: ['Melissa Heikkilä']
summary: 'This story originally appeared in The Algorithm, our weekly newsletter on AI. To get stories like this in your inbox first, sign up here. When we talk about the global race for AI dominance, the conversation often focuses on tensions between the US and China, and European efforts at regulating the technology.  But it’s high…'
---


_This story originally appeared in The Algorithm, our weekly newsletter on AI.
To get stories like this in your inbox first,_[_sign up
here_](https://forms.technologyreview.com/newsletters/ai-demystified-the-
algorithm/) _._

When we talk about the global race for AI dominance, the conversation often
focuses on tensions between the US and China, and European efforts at
regulating the technology.

But it’s high time we talked about another player: Africa.

As _MIT Technology Review_  has written before, AI is creating a [new colonial
world order](https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/04/19/1049592/artificial-
intelligence-
colonialism/?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024),
where the technology is enriching a small minority of people at the expense of
the rest of the world.

African AI researchers are determined to change that. They’re forging their
own path, developing tools that answer the needs of Africans, in their own
languages.

However, they face many barriers. AI research is eye-wateringly expensive, and
African startups and researchers get a fraction as much funding as their
Western or Asian counterparts. They have to innovate and rely on open-source
resources to do more with less.

Despite that, the African AI story reflects not only persistence and
innovation, but a determination to preserve cultures and shape how AI
technologies are used on the continent. [Read more
here](https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/11/11/1106762/africa-ai-
barriers/?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024)
from Abdullahi Tsanni, who went to this year’s Deep Learning Indaba, a
machine-learning conference held annually in Senegal, to learn about the
opportunities and barriers the African AI scene faces.

**And then some personal news!** This edition will be my last newsletter, and
from next week you’ll be in the extremely capable hands of my colleague [James
O’Donnell](https://www.technologyreview.com/author/james-
odonnell/?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024).
It’s been a delight writing this newsletter for the past two or so years, and
I’m so grateful you’ve joined me on this journey covering everything from
[snowballs of
bullshit](https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/12/20/1065667/how-ai-
generated-text-is-poisoning-the-
internet/?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024)
to [Taylor Swift’s
deepfakes](https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/01/29/1087376/dear-taylor-
swift-were-sorry-about-those-explicit-
deepfakes/?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024).
I’m not going anywhere, though. I’ll be diving deeper into the AI beat at _MIT
Technology Review_ to bring you stories on what’s happening in AI and how the
technology is changing us and our societies. Stay tuned for more!

**Finally, while I have you, this week we’re running our biggest sale of the
year, with 50% off an annual subscription to _MIT Technology Review_. New
subscribers receive a free digital report on generative AI and the future of
work. [Subscribe here](https://ter.li/Cyber24-CurrentLP-
Algorithm?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024).
**

* * *

# Now read the rest of The Algorithm

### Deeper Learning

**Why AI could eat quantum computing’s lunch**

Tech companies have been funneling billions of dollars into quantum computers
for years. The hope is that they’ll be a game changer for fields as diverse as
finance, drug discovery, and logistics. Those expectations have been
especially high in physics and chemistry, where the weird effects of quantum
mechanics come into play. In theory, this is where quantum computers could
have a huge advantage over conventional machines.

**Enter AI:  **But while the field struggles with the realities of tricky
quantum hardware, another challenger is making headway in some of these most
promising use cases. AI is now being applied to fundamental physics,
chemistry, and materials science in a way that suggests quantum computing’s
purported home turf might not be so safe after all.

Given the pace of recent advances, a growing number of researchers are now
asking whether AI could solve a substantial chunk of the most interesting
problems in chemistry and materials science before large-scale quantum
computers become a reality. [Read more from Edd Gent
here](https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/11/07/1106730/why-ai-could-eat-
quantum-computings-
lunch/?truid=&utm_source=the_algorithm&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the_algorithm.unpaid.engagement&utm_content=11-11-2024).

### Bits and Bytes

**The Saudis are planning a $100 billion AI powerhouse  
**Speaking of the race for AI dominance, this piece looks at how Saudi Arabia
wants in on AI action. And it’s putting its money where its mouth is. The
country is investing a massive sum to develop a tech hub that it hopes will
rival the neighboring United Arab Emirates.
([Bloomberg](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-11-06/saudis-
plan-100-billion-ai-powerhouse-to-rival-uae-s-tech-hub))

**AI is making it harder to believe what is real and what is not  
** Two recent examples show just how influential AI slop can be in warping our
sense of reality. In Dublin, [crowds
gathered](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/11/01/world/europe/fake-halloween-
parade-dublin.html) in the city center to wait for a Halloween parade to take
place. There was no parade planned, but the listing was created by AI and then
picked up by social media users and local media. By way of contrast, some
social media users dismissed [shocking images of the devastating recent floods
in Spain](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/nov/09/the-images-of-
spains-floods-werent-created-by-ai-the-trouble-is-people-think-they-were) as
AI-generated, although they were entirely real.

**AI companies are getting comfortable offering their technology to the
military  
** Militaries around the world have been pouring money into new technologies,
including AI. Meta and Anthropic are the latest tech companies to start
courting them, joining the likes of Google and OpenAI. ([The Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2024/11/08/anthropic-meta-
pentagon-military-openai/))

**OpenAI is shifting its strategy as the improvement in its AI tools slows
down  
** The current paradigm in AI development is to make things bigger to make
them better. But OpenAI’s new model, code-named Orion, only performs slightly
better than its predecessors. Instead, OpenAI is shifting to improving models
after their initial training. ([The
Information](https://www.theinformation.com/articles/openai-shifts-strategy-
as-rate-of-gpt-ai-improvements-slows))

