---
title: 'NRL develops robots that can service satellites in orbit'
date: 2024-11-15
categories: [{'term': '6-Axis', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'Aerospace', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'Defense / Security', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'End Effectors / Grippers', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'Markets / Industries', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'News', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'DARPA', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'northrop grumman', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'NRL', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}, {'term': 'U.S. Navy', 'scheme': None, 'label': None}]
url: https://www.therobotreport.com/nrl-develops-robots-that-can-service-space-satellites/
company: TheRobotReport
authors: ['The Robot Report Staff']
summary: 'As DARPA’s robotic payload developer for the RSGS program, NRL looked to the future to build and test satellite servicing capabilities.
The post NRL develops robots that can service satellites in orbit appeared first on The Robot Report.'
---


[![The Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites \(RSGS\) payload, two
gold robotic arms inside a grey tunnel. ](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/NRL-featured.jpg)](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/NRL-featured.jpg)

The Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites payload sits in the cryogenic thermal vacuum chamber at the Naval Center for Space Technology. | Credit: Sarah Peterson, U.S. Navy 

Satellites in geosynchronous orbit about 22,000 miles above Earth are crucial
for military, government, and commercial communications, as well as Earth-
observing science. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, or NRL, and the Defense
Advanced Projects Agency last month completed the development of a
spaceflight-qualified robotics suite capable of servicing satellites in orbit.

Under [DARPA](https://www.therobotreport.com/tag/darpa/) funding, the
[laboratory](https://www.nrl.navy.mil/)'s Naval Center for Space Technology
(NCST) developed the Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites (RSGS)
Integrated Robotic Payload (IRP). The organization delivered this new space
capability to commercial partner [Northrop
Grumman](https://www.therobotreport.com/tag/northrop-grumman/)’s
SpaceLogistics. The company will integrate the robotic payload with its
spacecraft bus, the Mission Robotics Vehicle (MRV).

“The recent completion of thermal vacuum testing marks a major milestone
toward achieving the program’s goal of demonstrating robotic servicing
capabilities on orbit in the near future,” said Dr. Bruce Danly, NRL director
of research.

“NRL’s contributions to the robotic payload are an essential part of realizing
this vision, which promises to transform satellite operations in geostationary
orbit, reduce costs for satellite operators, and enable capabilities well
beyond what we have today," he continued. "In fact, the anticipated
capabilities are potentially revolutionary for both national security and
civil applications."

NRL has longstanding relationships with academia and industry as a
collaborator and contractor. It participates in technology-transfer efforts
such as commercial licensing, cooperative research and development, and
educational partnerships.

The scientific and engineering command is dedicated to research for the U.S.
Navy and Marine Corps, from the seafloor to space and the information domain.
NRL is headquartered in Washington, D.C., with major field sites in Stennis
Space Center, Miss.; Key West, Fla.; and Monterey, Calif. It employs
approximately 3,000 civilian scientists, engineers, and support personnel.

* * *

![SITE AD for the 2025 Robotics Summit call for
presentations.](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/10/RSE25_728x90_CallforPresentations_Vs1.png) [Apply to
speak](https://www.roboticssummit.com/call-for-
presentations/?utm_source=therobotreport&utm_medium=banner&utm_id=callforpreso).

* * *

## NRL aims to unlock satellite servicing opportunities

Currently, spacecraft face significant challenges, in part because of the
inability to perform in-orbit repairs or upgrades. To compensate for the lack
of servicing options, satellites are often loaded with backup systems and
excess fuel, leading to increased complexity, weight, and cost.

“The military regularly fixes aircraft, tanks, ships, and trucks that break,”
said Glen Henshaw, Ph.D., senior scientist for robotics and autonomous systems
at NRL. "We upgrade aircraft and ships with the latest radars, computers, and
engines."

“Satellites are the only expensive equipment we buy that can’t be repaired or
upgraded once they are in the field, and this costs the taxpayer money," he
added. "RSGS is intended to change this situation. We intend to demonstrate
that we can upgrade and repair these valuable assets using robots.”

As DARPA’s robotic payload developer for the RSGS program, NRL looked to
design, build, integrate, and test new satellite-servicing capabilities.
Should this project prove successful, satellites could receive in-orbit
upgrades to extend their service lives, said Bernie Kelm, superintendent of
the Spacecraft Engineering Division at NRL NCST.

“This collaboration unlocks new servicing opportunities for both commercial
and government satellites, enabling usual-close inspections, orbital
adjustments, hardware upgrades, and repairs,” he said. “We’ve created advanced
spaceflight hardware and software that will significantly enhance satellite
servicing operations, including all robotic controls.”

[![Steven Butcher, Technology Service Corporation space robotics and
mechanisms engineer, performs an inspection of the Robotic Servicing of
Geosynchronous Satellites \(RSGS\) payload after completing testing in the
cryogenic thermal vacuum chamber. The system is made up of two, long, golden
robotic arms. ](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/NRL-2.jpg)](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/NRL-2.jpg)

Steven Butcher, Technology Service Corp. space robotics and mechanisms engineer, inspects the RSGS payload after completing testing at the NRL’s Naval Center for Space Technology. | Credit: Sarah Peterson, U.S. Navy

## About the Thermal Vacuum (TVAC) testing process

The test campaign put the robotic payload through its paces across the range
of temperatures it will face while in orbit and under vacuum conditions
similar to space. Engineers tested all aspects of the payload including
avionics, cameras, and lights.

They also demonstrated all operations with each of the two robotic arms,
including launch lock deployments, calibrations, and tool changing. The test
also verified SpaceWire communications, robotic compliance, and visual servo
control modes.

NRL worked for over two decades to mature the technology enabling the RSGS
program. Its intent is to safely and reliably repair and upgrade satellites,
some of which cost over a $1 billion.

In the near future, robotic satellite “mechanics” may extend the useful life
of satellites with new electronics, propulsion, or sensor capabilities, said
NRL. RSGS robots could demonstrate broad servicing as a precursor to building
large structures in orbit such as an observatory or solar power stations, said
the researchers.

Following its anticipated 2026 launch on the Northrop Grumman’s MRV spacecraft
bus, the robotic payload will undergo initial checkout and calibration with
full operational servicing missions to follow.

“NRL’s Team RSGS has spent nearly 10 years focused on the goal of completing
this first-of-a-kind, robotic servicing payload,” said William Vincent, NRL
RSGS program manager. “The completion of IRP TVAC represents a huge milestone
and countless hours of work from an incredible group of dedicated personnel.
Like sending a child off to college for the first time, shipping the IRP to
Dulles is a bittersweet experience.”

[![The Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites \(RSGS\) payload resides
in the cryogenic thermal vacuum chamber, a round chamber with the door open.
On the floor in front of the chamber is the NRL logo.
](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/NRL-1.jpg)](https://www.therobotreport.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/11/NRL-1.jpg)

Once on-orbit, the RSGS payload will inspect and service satellites in geosynchronous orbit. | Source: Sarah Peterson, U.S. Navy

The post [NRL develops robots that can service satellites in
orbit](https://www.therobotreport.com/nrl-develops-robots-that-can-service-
space-satellites/) appeared first on [The Robot
Report](https://www.therobotreport.com).

