---
title: 'OpenAI brings a new web search tool to ChatGPT'
date: 2024-10-31
categories: ['Artificial intelligence', 'App']
url: https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/10/31/1106472/chatgpt-now-lets-you-search-the-internet/
company: TechnologyReview
authors: ['Melissa Heikkilä, Mat Honan']
summary: 'ChatGPT can now search the web for up-to-date answers to a user’s queries, OpenAI announced today.  Until now, ChatGPT was mostly restricted to generating answers from its training data, which is current up to October 2023 for GPT-4o, and had limited web search capabilities. Searches about generalized topics will still draw on this information from…'
---


ChatGPT can now search the web for up-to-date answers to a user’s queries,
OpenAI announced today.

Until now, ChatGPT was mostly restricted to generating answers from its
training data, which is current up to October 2023 for GPT-4o, and had limited
web search capabilities. Searches about generalized topics will still draw on
this information from the model itself, but now ChatGPT will automatically
search the web in response to queries about recent information such as sports,
stocks, or news of the day, and can deliver rich multi-media results. Users
can also manually trigger a web search, but for the most part, the chatbot
will make its own decision about when an answer would benefit from information
taken from the web, says Adam Fry, OpenAI’s product lead for search.

“Our goal is to make ChatGPT the smartest assistant, and now we’re really
enhancing its capabilities in terms of what it has access to from the web,”
Fry tells _MIT Technology Review._ The feature is available today for the
chatbot’s paying users.

![](https://wp.technologyreview.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/10/Screenshot-2024-10-30-at-18.17.41.png)ChatGPT triggers
a web search when the user asks about local restaurants in this example

While ChatGPT search, as it is known, is initially available to paying
customers, OpenAI intends to make it available for free later, even when
people are logged out. The company also plans to combine search with its voice
features and Canvas, its interactive platform for coding and writing, although
these capabilities will not be available in today’s initial launch.

The company unveiled a standalone
[prototype](https://openai.com/index/searchgpt-prototype/) of web search in
July. Those capabilities are now built directly into the chatbot. OpenAI says
it has “brought the best of the SearchGPT experience into ChatGPT.”

OpenAI is the latest tech company to debut an AI-powered search assistant,
challenging similar tools from competitors such as Google, Microsoft, and
startup Perplexity. Meta, too, is reportedly [developing its own AI search
engine](https://www.theinformation.com/articles/meta-develops-ai-search-
engine-to-lessen-reliance-on-google-microsoft). As with Perplexity’s
interface, users of ChatGPT search can interact with the chatbot in natural
language, and it will offer an AI-generated answer with sources and links to
further reading. In contrast, Google’s AI Overviews offer a short AI-generated
summary at the top of the website, as well as a traditional list of indexed
links.

These new tools could eventually challenge Google’s 90% market share in online
search. AI search is a very important way to draw more users, says Chirag
Shah, a professor at the University of Washington, who specializes in online
search. But he says it is unlikely to chip away at Google’s search dominance.
Microsoft’s high-profile attempt with Bing barely made a dent in the market,
Shah says.

Instead, OpenAI is trying to create a new market for more powerful and
interactive [AI
agents](https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/07/05/1094711/what-are-ai-
agents/), which can take complex actions in the real world, Shah says.

The new search function in ChatGPT is a step toward these agents.

It can also deliver highly contextualized responses that take advantage of
chat histories, allowing users to go deeper in a search. Currently, ChatGPT
search is able to recall conversation histories and continue the conversation
with questions on the same topic.

ChatGPT itself can also remember things about users that it can use later
—sometimes it does this automatically, or you can ask it to remember
something. Those “long-term” memories affect how it responds to chats. Search
doesn’t have this yet—a new web search starts from scratch— but it should get
this capability in the “next couple of quarters,” says Fry. When it does,
OpenAI says it will allow it to deliver far more personalized results based on
what it knows.

“Those might be persistent memories, like ‘I’m a vegetarian,’ or it might be
contextual, like ‘I’m going to New York in the next few days,’” says Fry. “If
you say ‘I’m going to New York in four days,’ it can remember that fact and
the nuance of that point,” he adds.

To help develop ChatGPT’s web search, OpenAI says it leveraged its
partnerships with news organizations such as Reuters, the _Atlantic_ , _Le
Monde_ , the _Financial Times_ , Axel Springer, Condé Nast, and _Time._
However, its results include information not only from these publishers, but
any other source online that does not actively block its search crawler.  

It’s a positive development that ChatGPT will now be able to retrieve
information from these reputable online sources and generate answers based on
them, says Suzan Verberne, a professor of natural-language processing at
Leiden University, who has studied information retrieval. It also allows users
to ask follow-up questions.

But despite the enhanced ability to search the web and cross-check sources,
the tool is not immune from the persistent tendency of AI language models to
make things up or get it wrong. When _MIT Technology Review_ tested the new
search function and asked it for vacation destination ideas, ChatGPT suggested
“luxury European destinations” such as Japan, Dubai, the Caribbean islands,
Bali, the Seychelles, and Thailand. It offered as a source an
[article](https://www.thetimes.com/travel/inspiration/luxury-holiday-
destinations-around-the-world-h5j2sd2hz) from the _Times,_ a British
newspaper, which listed these locations as well as those in Europe as luxury
holiday options.

“Especially when you ask about untrue facts or events that never happened, the
engine might still try to formulate a plausible response that is not
necessarily correct,” says Verberne. There is also a risk that misinformation
might seep into ChatGPT’s answers from the internet if the company has not
filtered its sources well enough, she adds.

Another risk is that the current push to access the web through AI search will
disrupt the internet’s digital economy, argues Benjamin Brooks, a fellow at
Harvard University’s Berkman Klein Center, who previously led public policy
for Stability AI, [in an op-ed published by  _MIT Technology
Review_](https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/10/31/1106504/ai-search-could-
break-the-web/) today.

“By shielding the web behind an all-knowing chatbot, AI search could deprive
creators of the visits and ‘eyeballs’ they need to survive,” Brooks writes.

